On our zoom.
Yes, Madam chair. We're just bringing her in now.
Great. Thank you.
Good morning. Good morning.
Um, we have you this morning.
We have you, um, Kathleen, we have you for five minutes.
Um, that includes any time you wanna leave
for questions. So go ahead.
Thank you very much. I'm a retired New Zealander,
who was brought up in a time
when New Zealand was a far fairer and more equal society,
and it really felt as though we had one another's back.
This bill really undermines fairness
and it undermines the sense
of Kiwis looking out for one another.
It sets a new slippery slope
for the employer employee relationship
with all the power
or most of the power at least sitting on the
side of the employer.
I am dismayed by the proposed changes
to the employment relations amendment Bill
set out in this bill.
I'm aware that in the seventies, from the twenties
to the eighties and nineties,
that governments both national
and labor supported people into their first homes.
We were, they both had the aim of a property owning involved
participatory democracy,
and that meant that employment relationships also
reflected those values, and there was space for both owners
and managers, employers
and employees to have a fair say and have a fair go.
This bill really undermines employees
and contractors having a fair go.
So just to go through my comments,
the first part sets out a new class of worker,
a specified contractor without employment protections.
It's appalling. The second part,
it dismantles the effectiveness
of Perth personal grievance mechanisms that we already have,
and it does not provide effective remedies for all parties.
In other words, it's that slippery slope
that favors the employer.
The third part of the bill, um,
workers paid over 180,000
or more per year can be fired at will.
Now, that's a high income granted,
but actually people on high income still have mortgages,
insurance rates, higher purchase agreements living
for themselves and their family costs and other commitments.
It's ridiculous for anybody to be able
to be fired at will when they have obligations, financial
and other obligations that clearly cannot cope
with such drastic change.
The fourth part of the bill
removes the obligation on employers to ensure
that new employees have timely information about
the relevant union.
Now, I'm not a member, currently a member of a union,
um, but I think it's a question of people being able
to make an informed choice choice.
The fifth part of the bill expands the effects
of the 90 day trial periods
that is simply grossly unfair to new employees.
And the sixth part would amend section 1 0 3 A
and we can protection for,
for employees from unjustifiable actions
and conditions imposed by employers.
I don't think there's much point going through the bill
because I just oppose those provisions in their entirety.
I ask that the bill will be withdrawn
or that all those sections that I have been have referred to
are changed so that there is more of an even playing field
for both employers, managers and employees.
I do want us to live in a society that feels
and is fairer than what is being proposed in this bill.
This bill will drive down salaries and wages
and make it even more difficult for the 50%
of the population who only have two to 3%
of New Zealand's wealth and are all already in food poverty
and power poverty.
It's appalling.
Thank you, Kathleen. We've, um,
we've reached time. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Goodbye.
Uh, and we've got the police association. Next
we have Erin, uh,
is it coming through?
Yep. Hi there, Erin.
We can't see them
yet coming through.
Hi, Erin. Um, good morning
and welcome to the, um, committee.
We have, um, 10 minutes with you today.
So that includes time for questions and the time is yours.
Go ahead. Can't hear you.
Still can't hear you.
Can you check your microphone and speaker,
Uh, madam chair? We
do have the next submitter around if
We'd like to them next.
Okay. Yeah, we'll go back to here. Okay. Yeah. Cool.
Okay, so the next um, is Unite Union and we've got Griffin.
Good morning Griffin, and welcome to the committee.
Um, we have you, um, for 10 minutes, um,
including time for questions.
Um, go ahead.
Um, my name is Griffin and I'm a fast food worker,
and here as a member of United Union.
We have 6,000 members.
Our members are based in the hospitality in industry,
primarily in fast food, accommodation and entertainment.
Unite Union opposes the employment relations bill 2025,
the bill and the strongest possible terms.
There are three simple reasons.
We as hospitality workers
and members of unite oppose this bill.
We need fair and just processes.
If we are unjustified dismissed
or treated unfairly at work, we need access to unions
and collective agreements.
We need paid transparency
and protection from 90 day trial periods.
We need Fair on 0.1.
Uh, currently, if we're dismissed in our workplaces,
the process must be fair
and the reason for firing must be fair.
If they're not, we can challenge them.
The proposed changes will make it significantly harder
to pursue justice for dismissals, which lack fair process
or a fair reason for fire.
Even if an employee is able
to establish unjustified dismissal,
there'll be significant barriers to fair compensation.
Employees will be less successful
and challenging employer behavior in the compensation
for members will be reduced significantly.
If you're dismissed, it's much harder to find a job
and also get a benefit if you are unfairly dismissed
under these new proposals.
The punishment happens three times, losing your,
your job unfairly, not being able to challenge it
and struggling to get a new source of income.
We're just having a bit of problem there.
Griffin, with your, um, um, sound, um,
if you just sit forward a bit, that might be better. Yeah.
Okay. Yeah, That's better. Yeah, that's better.
Don't be too far, but yeah, just a bit better. Thanks.
Okay. Uh,
as an individual up against a multinational fast food chain,
it's pretty clear there's a power imbalance.
Even though our employers have a lot more power than we do,
it seems that these changes,
our behaviors will come under scrutiny, but there's
or not, such as unfairly dismissing someone
or treating them unfairly.
The same goes for a situation
where we are treated unjustifiably by our employers
and we wanna challenge it.
Their compensation, whether this behavior is found
to be true, has been effectively removed in these changes.
Even if you do prove unjustifiable treatment
or dismissal, the idea
that there are no remedies available makes raising a point.
Personal grievance pretty much pointless.
There is no punishment to the bad behavior
of employees whatsoever.
I'm very worried that in our workplaces, fire will happen
as a result of this, and unemployment
among young people will rise.
Um, on 0.2, uh, currently for the first 30 days
of employment, employees working within coverage
of a collective agreement receive its terms and conditions.
The act provides that new employees on collective
by sites receive sufficient information about the union.
Employees are required to provide new workers
with active choice forms that a worker has the option
of completing, which put the worker in touch
with the union if they choose
and fast food workplaces such as mine.
This has worked really well and
provided a real opportunity to connect with unions
and to experience firsthand the benefits that come
with collective terms and conditions.
This has overall improved our pay
and conditions in our work lives.
These provisions are repealed by the bill.
Employers can use these amendments to sidestep unions
and impose individual employment agreements on workers
workers before workers have a chance
to experience collective coverage.
I'm really worried about what these changes will mean
for new workers coming through,
and particularly their pay rates and conditions.
Um, on 0.3,
because the changes proposed by the bill allow employers
to not offer new workers in unionized workplaces the terms
of the collective agreement,
these workers will not have access
to full information about pay rates at the point
at which they're negotiating.
Their starting rate, lack of transparency is likely
to result in lower pay rates for young workers like myself.
These changes are expected to increase the use
of 90 day trials, which are generally prevented
by the persistent, by the presence
of a collective agreement on a site,
an increase in 90 day trials as an increase to insecurity
and vulnerability of workers,
particularly in sectors such as fast food.
In conclusion, we strongly oppose all
of the changes proposed in the bill
and recommend that the committee report back to the house
that the bill should not progress.
Okay. Thank you very much, Jan ti
Hey Griffin. Thanks very
much for that. That was really good.
And, um, gave us a really clear overview
of your circumstances as in the fast food industry.
Can you just tell me a little bit more about that whole, uh,
30 days with the union?
What do you, when you first went to work there,
if you didn't have that, um, idea of the coverage
of the collective agreement when you first went to work,
where you work, uh, what do you have known
what your rights were as a worker
or how would you have found
that out if you didn't have that?
Uh, I don't even know. I mean, I don't think, um,
I personally already knew a bit about unions
before I joined, but a lot of the people, like my coworkers
that I talk to, have no idea even what a union is
or let alone anything about coverage
or rights or anything like that. So that,
So, so it's a little bit of a protection for you
and for others at the moment.
Yeah. Yeah, exactly.
Cool. Well thank you and thank you so much for that.
Really appreciate it.
Okay. Do we have any other questions?
Um, doesn't look like there are.
Thank you very much for your time, um,
and, uh, for presenting today.
Thank You. Thank you.
Alright, we'll um, go back to Erin.
Hopefully we can hear her.
Hi Erin. Um, can you start speaking?
I can't hear you can't hear you.
Just start speaking, Erin, so we can see a few, um,
if we can hear you at all.
Do we have Megan Morris by any chance? Clarks?
Uh, no, but we do have from Business
New Zealand. Okay, great.
Um, can you, Erin, can you say Erin might need
to come in via your phone?
Might be, yeah.
Um, um, for the Clarks, let's jump to, um,
Paul Mackay for Business New Zealand.
Just seeing if Paul can join now. Okay.
Hi Paul. Um, we're running a,
we've got some technical issues with other people,
so we thought we'd jump ahead to you.
Are you okay to present now?
I'm absolutely fine, yes. Yes.
Perfect. We have 10 minutes with you.
Um, I'd love include some time
for questions if you have, if we have any.
Um, but if you could go ahead now, that'd be great.
Great. And thank you very much for this opportunity to,
uh, appear in front of you
because, uh, this bill has, uh,
got a lot of people very interested.
I see there's a lot of submissions in,
in, in very simple terms.
Business New Zealand broadly supports this bill,
but we do have some concerns that some
of the drafting may create unintended consequences,
which we think can be rectified with, uh, some amendments,
which we've made a, uh, we've
provided you a fairly detailed paper with a lot
of, uh, a lot of that in it.
So I won't go through the detail,
but just working through the various sections of it.
The specified contractors section, I mean a,
a very topical issue globally as well as in New Zealand.
Um, and one of the concerns that we have is that the way
that the bill is drafted at the moment,
it talks about effectively a relationship between person A
and person B, which in, in a nutshell is a person
to person relationship.
And yet the very nature of platform work or the,
or the emerging nature of platform work is the, the, the,
uh, the existence of this, um, algorithm or platform or,
or the automated decision making process
that sits squarely in the middle of the interaction
or the transactions that take place.
And it's the role of that intermediary that seems
to be missing from the, from the bill.
And without it, it stands to, um,
not work in the sense that we look at the,
at the gateway test as it's being called as a filter, not
as a replacement for the existing test, the whole test, uh,
whether a person is an employee or not,
but as a filter that says, let's get rid of the obvious.
If you pass the four gateway test questions,
then no more questions need to be asked.
There is, there is a definitive answer.
If you can't, then of course there needs
to be a deeper inquiry in which the existing test is
more than adequate for.
So we don't see it as a radical change to the law.
It is, as we said,
or as I said, a filter, which should get rid of, uh,
quite a number of the queries around
who is a contractor and who is not.
The thing about the intermediary side
of things is very topical internationally as well.
The International Labor Organization this year began a two
year process of negotiating a convention
or a treaty on platform work.
And although it's got another year's worth of work to do
before it will be concluded, the three areas
that were agreed this year included the definitions
and scope of that convention.
And the definitions include the recognition
of this intermediate or automated decision making process.
So internationally, it's accepted that that's an element
that ought to be present and we think it should be here too.
So we've recommended some changes to
that, uh, side of things.
There's a bit of drafting suggested in our amendment, which,
which would suffice.
Um, it could be more detailed perhaps,
but, uh, we'll leave it there.
If I just quickly go to the remedies for personal grievances
where supportive of this change, um, we do see it as more
of a recalibration of the existing ability
to reduce remedies because there is already a, an ability,
but as over time, um, practice tends to sort of limit
what people, what the judiciary actually do
as opposed to what they can do.
And I think there's a need,
and I think this bill does it, is to kind of
recalibrate the scope of decisions
or the, the availability of decisions.
That said, there is a need to, um, ensure
that if we are to have a situation
where serious misconduct would automatically get no remedy
at all, there does need to be a bit of strengthening
or clarity around what serious misconduct is.
Let let that become the battleground rather than whether
or not the person should get any remedies or not.
So one of the recommendations we make is that, that,
that the, that serious misconduct, uh, is defined
and we note that, uh,
other submissions like the Law Society have
had similar concerns.
So I think it's not just common to new business New Zealand,
but it's a, it's a broader issue of justice to make sure
that there is a fair, uh, appreciation of what it is
that the contribution was
and what remedies ought not to be applied, ought
to be applied with the income threshold for grievances.
We did quite a bit of work on the background of this,
and it's fair to say that that, uh, the New Zealand proposal
to have only a salary threshold would seem
to be a standalone proposition.
Most countries that we've looked at,
and there are a number of identified in our submission,
have, uh, recognized that there are a number of areas where
the simple threshold may create problems.
And I'll, I'll highlight one example.
There are quite a number of occupations
that have high paid people in them.
And in fact, there's over a hundred thousand people
according to IRD, who earn over 180,000.
And not all of them are in positions
of power or, or authority.
They're spread across a variety.
So if you take for instance, it, um, quite a number
of people can be doing the same or similar work,
but be earning different amounts.
So you may have people in the same company doing the same
or similar work, some of whom have no excess rights
to grievances and some who do.
So those sorts of issues can be addressed
by taking a more role-based approach,
or at least adding a role-based approach to the criteria
to make sure that we are targeting the right kind of people
who we support.
The idea of, uh, in terms of, uh,
every business has critical people to the direction
and profitability and su success of the business
who can in fact be detrimental if they are not, um, able to,
to be, uh, managed in, in suitable ways.
And this is one of the mechanisms that is already used.
I mean, managed exits are, are nothing new.
This is actually kind of bringing them more into the open.
Um, but we do believe
that there needs to be some more focus.
Uh, and lastly, on the removal of the 30 day requirement
for, for people to be on the collective agreement,
we support this as, as simply an administrative
sensible thing to do.
Very many businesses, uh, find this, uh,
at an unnecessary abuse of bureaucracy.
Ideally, people will,
will go onto the contract they're going
to stay on when they start employment rather than having to,
to arbitrarily be placed in one
for a period while they make up their minds what to do.
So we see this as a, as a, as a simplification
and administrative simplification that will be
of great benefit to quite a lot of businesses, uh,
administratively, particularly smaller businesses.
I think those are the main points.
There's a lot more in our submission,
but we'll leave you to read that.
Um, and very happy to take any questions.
Thank you, Paul. Um,
we've got one question from Jan Tanti.
Hi Paul. Lovely to see you. You do? Yeah.
Hey, um, just on that last point, you know, just talked
to Griffin before around when they entered fast food
and young people entering into business, not
into their first, maybe their first job,
not understanding their protections.
And you talk about that being an administrative task
that would free up for business.
How then do we balance that with the protections
that people need when they,
particularly those young people going into their first jobs,
um, how, how would we ensure that they know
what their protections are as employees as well?
Well, I think these are the things that ought to be sorted
before a person is employed.
It's, it's, the, the issue that gets raised with us is
that having started, there's this whole period of 30 days
during which business is required
to chase around and do various things.
This really ought to be something which is done upfront.
This, it's not that it
shouldn't happen, I quite agree with you.
Everybody should know what
protections are available to them.
And it's a bit like going and buying a house.
I mean, there's a long big contract that the,
that the real estate people have put in front of you
and we beside you if you don't go through it
and make sure you know what's, um, I think, you know, that
to me, at any rate is, is one of those things that,
that people should put more effort into it, into upfront.
Um, the information
that unions have available should be available upfront
rather than being a, a, an ongoing process after employment.
Yeah. I guess what I'm trying to get to in my head,
and it's, it's purely getting my head around it, is
how do we ensure that happens?
So, um, I I, I don't disagree,
but I'm not sure that I've got a solution to how
that would happen yet in my head.
We, we do actually already have the requirement that a
and a person in signing a contract has got to acknowledge
that they've had the opportunity to take advice.
Um, the, the content of that advice that they,
that they're urge to seek can include and,
but currently doesn't include details
around things like if there is a union
or a contract present is, is they have been informed of.
So there's some contractual certainty
that they've actually had the opportunity to have
that information and
that people don't just duck the responsibility.
Mm-hmm. But it's the ongoing administrative processes
after employment that the current situation is the most
complained of situation that we get.
So there's where we see some sense,
it's not about taking away protections at all.
Yeah, no, no, no, no.
I just, I'm just trying to get my head
around it in this in instant.
Adam, do have I got time for another
Question? Yeah. Up. Yes, go ahead.
Um, so you talked about the 180,000
and only that being income threshold.
Just want to go into,
because I could, I read your, I've read your submission,
but I can't bring it up again now for some reason,
and I'm not certain why.
So I'll get that sorted later.
But can you just explain why
that would be an issue if we only only
relied upon the income?
It's because you, you do get situations in some,
in some companies it is probably the best example,
but medicine is another
where you get people doing exactly the same
job, but they're on different levels.
They're, some of them are younger, less experienced, some
of them more experienced, but they're doing the same work
and some of them are earning over 180, so they get cut out
of a personal grievance while those others
who are under 180 doing the same work don't get cut out.
So there's potential,
therefore not only discriminatory, um, uh, uh, claims,
but also it's, while it's technically possible
for the business and that person to agree
that they could waive that particular situation
and have a personal, it adds then a whole layer of,
of administration
and negotiation to a process
that is simply about rectifying some imbalances.
The other thing is, some of those people don't actually
sit in positions of power.
They're simply highly paid, technically expert people.
Great, thank you. But that's all we've got time for now.
Thank you very much for that.
Um, and we'll see you later, Paul.
Thank you very much. Great, thank you.
Who have we got next team?
Uh, we can try the, uh,
so a police association next if you'd like to.
Yeah, we'll give them a go. Yeah.
Okay. I'm trying to, can
You hear me? Oh, yes. Yeah,
we can. Hooray. Oh my goodness. Thanks Erin.
Um, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Um, that includes, um, time for, um, questions.
So if you just go ahead. Okay.
Morina Kato, and apologies for my it not working.
I hope it hasn't caused too much disruption this morning.
I'm representing the police association
to aha pie this morning.
Um, you've read our submission.
We represent 14,000 members being almost all theary
of New Zealand and most of the non-sworn
or police employee group who we refer to
as the backbone to the front line.
Um, we understand that our submission's quite brief,
but we wanna make it clear that we wholly, um,
oppose all aspects of this amendment bill
that you're considering.
Um, we focused on three key areas
and I'll just, um, run over those quickly in my submission.
But first of all, our organization provides crucial services
to the men and women who are protecting and serving in.
Um, we provide health insurances
with a focus on those specific needs of police,
and we provide life in general insurances,
and we provide all sorts of assistance
for people in hardship.
Um, as well, we coadminister a sick leave bank.
We are, um, too armed with police in a number
of different aspects throughout their careers.
We like to think of ourselves
as providing the broader family around the family
that is working for police in Alua.
And crucially, we also provide the services, um,
of a union supporting those workers at work.
And so that means ensuring that they're paid according
to their collective agreement, that they've got dignity in
their employment, that their work is absolutely
as safe as it can be.
Um, their terms and conditions are fair
and we've got a real interest in, um, attracting
and retaining in the police service
the very best that we can get.
So we, in order to do that, need the best policy
and legislative settings
that we can to protect those workers.
And we see this bill is absolutely moving us backwards.
Um, we, this bill attacks, uh,
workers' rights on the individual and the collective level
and, um, we see it as, um, counter to the implement,
uh, relationship that we would like to promote.
So in order to protect workers from that very starting point
of their careers, the, um, we talk at the teacher, um,
sorry, the police training college
and, uh, we sign them up to our union there,
but we also really utilize that list
that we get from police, um,
the government agency in the first 30 days of employment.
And we can sign people up to our association quickly
before any problems arise.
Um, and we can make sure that they're paid fairly
and in line with their colleagues.
Police officers and employees know that they have
to work hard to together to keep their terms
and conditions of work, um, fair and current
and the entry point terms
and conditions that a person receives when they begin work
have been negotiated, maintained,
and enforced by the new workers, colleagues
who have been in the service before them
and have been supported by our association
and bargaining for many years.
Police is a profession with a long memory
and a strong history.
The collective agreements embody the work that has been done
by past police for the benefit of the current and police.
The changes to the 30 day rule are an insult to that history
and the importance of collective agreements,
and it's an insult to workers who have fought hard
for those conditions which keep a dependable,
dependable police service in place.
So we point out in our submission that, um, it's fair
to have an idea of your starting rate for the job.
It's fair to be on the same terms
and conditions as your colleagues,
and it's smoother for everybody involved.
And I would say even administratively, um,
especially administratively to, um, know what allowances
and pay rates supply when a person begins work.
Removing the 30 day CEA coverage creates confusion
and we believe is grossly unfair.
Removing the requirement for the active choice forms
to be sent to us creates a barrier for new starts,
and it will be a barrier to entry to our association
and all that we provide for the people policing in.
We also think it will, as I've said
before, create administrative um, issues,
but that's for, um, police government department
to talk to you about.
It also appears to be intended to decrease the power
and numbers of unions like ours
and weights the power more in the employer's court,
which we think is the general direction
of the amendments in this bill.
And, and we, we oppose that as a backward step
regarding the attacks on the personal grievance processes.
We oppose all of the pro proposals.
We represent many people in personal grievances.
It's never done lightly
and our team has spent many years supporting, um,
people in a situation which doesn't result in justice.
Even with the current settings in place, the changes
around the contributory conduct
for remedies are particularly egregious.
Our submission makes it really clear that we deem
that step unnecessary
and we give our view around how it will drive the wrong sort
of behavior in the employment relationship.
It pushes towards a punitive, um,
option rather than a restorative relationship.
And we already operate in a, in a environment
of risk aversion within police.
Um, we operate with people in senior roles who are used
to prosecuting crimes and we need employment law
that reinforces that employment as a relationship.
And then employment issues
and investigations are not criminal proceedings.
As pointed out in our submission.
The changes proposed will drive a behavior of dragging
up allegations rather than seeking that proactive resolution
and it damages a relationship
which could have been restored.
Now in our police service.
We are no way near meeting the mark of 500 new recruits.
Um, we think restoration
and retention should be front
of mind when employment problems arise rather than easing
and enabling the employer to dismiss.
If this bill passes, we've got no doubt we will see even,
um, more of an escalation of issues unnecessarily
and we will risk losing good people out
of the police service where they could have,
where there could have been a resolution.
Um, we also have an issue with 1 1 3 A, two A and B.
So this is the one $80,000 threshold, um,
after which there is no recourse, um,
if you've been treated unjustly in your employment.
Now, for us, for our members,
this covers anyone in the inspector tier or superintendents
or the police employee equivalents of those roles.
So that's a substantial group of people.
Over a thousand people would be affected by the change.
And they're not commissioner level roles.
They're not the highest most powerful roles in policing.
Um, they are as vulnerable as lower level employees
to reorganization issues.
They receive complaints, they are just as vulnerable
to facing allegations
or having the conditions
of their collective employment agreements breached.
They're also crucial in uncovering wrongdoing at more senior
levels, if any wrongdoing were to take place.
And there has been a recent high profile, um, in incident
of wrongdoing among a very senior police level, um,
senior level police officer.
And we think we would like to see the encouragement
of workplaces of trust
and confidence where whistleblowing is encouraged.
Our concern and our contention is that if managers
among our membership face dismissal at the will
of the employer with no recourse, then um, if they see, uh,
if they're see be seen to be problematic
or inconvenient by raising wrongdoing, um,
that will have a chilling effect on, um, on whistle blowing.
And that's not the culture that we
as the police association believe
should exist within police.
And finally, we are concerned that a fire at will, um,
should not become a cultural norm within
workplaces in New Zealand.
And this is the thin end of that.
Wedge unions have an important democratic role
to play in balancing the power relationship in workplaces,
upholding terms and conditions,
and ensuring respectful work culture.
We understand the changes put forward in this bill, um,
which is kind of consistent with some
of the other messaging we're getting from government is
undermining of the employment relationship
and it seems to prefer those who employ over those who work
and the unions who work as collectivized into such
as the police association.
We strongly urge the select committee
to think about the impact of changing the settings
of an employment relationship
to weigh more in favor of the employers.
Um, and we urge the select committee
to not support the passage of this poor amendment bill,
which it fails in terms of its rationale
and also, um, would be a backward step
for ev all workers within New Zealand.
Thank you. That's all. Um, I'll say for now
and I'm happy to take questions if there is time
Janti.
Thanks Erin, lovely to see you
and lovely to hear you as well.
Um, sorry, Just really interesting that point you made
around the whistleblowers
and the fact that, that it keeps the, the, you know,
that's been important in the police over history
that we've been able to protect those people
because it's kept that continual improvement in the,
the police force and the culture within the police
force. Can you just
Explain, you've go under a minute
to rep respond, just to let you know,
Being a little bit more on that, around
what this could damage,
what this bill could damage? Yeah, so
You got, you've
Got people who aren't decision makers,
who are not commissioners, but in senior roles
and they're in investigation, investigator roles
and superintendent roles.
We want, um, workplace cultures in police
and all across the public service
where if there is wrongdoing, um, being, being observed
that people feel safe and free to raise their concerns.
Um, what we are concerned will happen with an environment
where you can be fired at will with no recourse is if you,
if there is anybody who was undertaking wrongdoing, got wind
that you, um, had some information
or were willing to speak up,
that you could just be sent down the road
and you would've no legal recourse at that point.
We think that's dangerous.
We don't think that people earning who suddenly earn, um,
a dollar more than 180,000, um, uh,
any less vulnerable than any other worker when it comes
to this type of treatment. We think this is
A great, thank you for that. We've
met time. Thanks very much, Erin. See you later.
Um, can we go back to Megan Morris now if she's there?
Good morning, Megan.
Um, thank you for your patience this morning with us.
Um, we have, um, I think it's, uh, five minutes with you.
Um, if you can, um, go ahead
and, um, you can take our submission,
your submission is read, um,
and then, um, just have some time
for questions if you want to allow that.
Yep. Thank you. Um, thanks for the opportunity, um,
to present to the committee today.
Uh, just to be really clear, um, I strongly oppose, uh,
the proposed changes to the Employment Relations Amendment
Act, uh, as outlined in my submission.
Um, this bill is a significant attack on the basic rights
of workers in it undermines support for union access
to sites and workers and entrenches employer powers.
And it's disregarding the current, um, wording
and the act about the recognition
of the inherent imbalance in the employment relationship.
I wanted to touch on a couple of points.
Um, the specified contractor, um, as an introduction,
as a new ca category of worker is, in my view,
completely unnecessary.
There is already, um, a number
of really good solid legal tests which consider the real
nature of the relationship, not just the label giving to it.
And if you enable employers
to just put a label on something, um, it will completely,
um, remove the ability of a worker
to challenge the nature of the relationship.
Um, which in my view is poor law making.
Um, it was interesting listening to the couple
of the previous speakers, I have to say I disagree with,
with Paul from the EMA, which is probably no surprises.
Um, they, particularly around the, um,
fire up will, uh, for people earning over 180 k.
So there are a number of workers in our, um,
economy in our society, um, academics, um,
there certainly IT people like that who
earn over 180,000.
Um, their rights are sometimes protected
by collective agreements, sometimes not,
but in removing their ability to seek, um,
redress under the personal grievance provisions,
uh, is inappropriate.
They do not have any more bargaining power in the
relationship than, um, a senior manager, um, particularly
around the right to have reinstatement
as a primary re remedy.
I also just wanted to pick up on, um, the 90 day rule,
and I thought Paul made a couple of really good points,
but the issue is actually a lot
of young people going into the workforce now, uh,
particularly in private sector, have no access to unions.
When it says they should seek advice, the advice
that they often seek is mom
and dad at home, who no disrespect to parents,
the world over given I'M one as well, um, don't always know,
um, the legal ins and outs of the situation.
And so it's, um, and they won't, they won't have capacity
or ability to access legal advice either.
So it's particularly problematic.
Um, and too often, uh, we see people at days sort
of in their 80 to 89 range losing their job were
and not having any ability to address it.
Um, I just kind of wanted
to touch on a couple of other things.
So I've been in the workforce since 1986.
Um, I have three sons, all of
who work in the private sector.
One, uh, two of them worked in spaces
where their collective agreements.
I've worked, um, for the last 25 years in unions
and I've worked across the public and private sector.
So I've got a fair understanding of how this all works.
Um, the majority of my career has been advocating
for workers, whether it's when an employment relationship
breaks down, when restructures occur,
or negotiating collectives
and working with people whose employment experience has
become untenable, um, have need
to have the confidence that the law allows them an
opportunity to address, um, the issues
that are causing them concern and possibly resolve them.
The proposed amendments
to the ACT do not give me any confidence
that an individual worker will successfully be able to seek,
um, redress under the law currently
as these amendments are proposed.
So I'm happy to stop there and take questions.
Um, we don't have any questions.
Thank you very much, and, um, thanks for your submission.
Thank you. Um, so next is the association
of, um, salaried medical specialist, um, Steve Haring.
Uh,
Good morning, Steve.
Oh, we haven't quite got 'em yet.
Hi, Steve. Um, good morning. Good morning.
Uh, welcome to the committee. We have 10
minutes with you today.
Um, and that includes some time for questions, so go ahead.
Okay. Just let me get this to the right screen. Thank you.
Uh, thank you for the opportunity.
Look, um, um, I'm speaking on behalf obviously of a SMS.
Um, we are the union representing senior medical
and dental employed workforce.
We have 6,200 members mostly employed in crown entities like
Health New Zealand, uh, blood service a CC.
We've just undertaken two weeks of, um,
member meetings throughout New Zealand,
and we received overwhelming negative reactions
to the government's proposal to remove the right
of senior doctors to challenge an unfair
or unjustified dismissal.
Um, many audience were asking us, uh, if this is
how I I am valued by my employer, why would I stay here?
I'd just like to say at the outset, uh,
dismissal at will is not a New Zealand value
and remove removing compensation rights
and thereby making fundamental rights.
Nary is not a New Zealand value, um,
and unsurprising these changes do not comply
with their international obligations.
So I'd endorse, um, uh, the submission of the CTU
and other sub other submitters, um,
against this legislation.
But we want to concentrate today on the 180 k um, bar to
pursuing personal grievances.
Uh, it's clear that, um,
the medical workforce was not the intended target
of this provision.
When MB first approached us, um, last end of last year to
to discuss, um, the possibility
of this legislation coming up, they did advise us
that we weren't the intended target.
Obviously, senior managers are the intended target.
Um, but EMB said that simply
because they couldn't work out a way
of legislatively defining what a ma a manager,
we've been effectively scooped up
in the coverage of this provision.
Um, and as the, um, risk, as the RIS points out,
um, non managerial experts like me,
like the medical profession scientists, IT people, um,
effectively weren't the intended target.
And there's no evidence to suggest that there is a problem
with the personal grievance process
around those workforce workforces.
The fact that, um, that we're not the intended, um, target,
um, is, is backed up by the other
other assumption in the legislation
that our members have alternative arra the ability
to negotiate alternative arrangements.
And as has been submitted today
by people like Paul mackay from Business New Zealand, um,
our members are effectively working in large teams
of people on similar contracts.
They don't actually negotiate their terms
in an individual fashion.
And if they were able to negotiate their, their,
their terms in an individual fashion,
it would cause major upset with their colleagues.
So we are in an industry really
where there are standard contracts that are offered
to people on a take leave basis, um,
because anything else would cause major
disruption in the workplace.
So, so our members don't have the ability
to negotiate individual terms different from
their colleagues who they're gonna be working with
for the rest of their careers.
And, um, and so certainly don't have the ability
to negotiate alternative, alternative remedies to
unfair dismissal.
And I'd have to say it wouldn't be our, um,
it wouldn't be our observation that the HR function within
large crown entities
regarding frontline workers would've the capacity
to negotiate individual, individual conditions without, um,
getting in, getting into big trouble either.
Um, my other observation would be the system appears
to be working at the moment, it's my observation that, um,
doctors have very low recourse
to the employment institutions.
Um, and that's not because they don't have rights to, to go
and use the employment court
or the employment relations authority, but it's
because managers are con, are constrained by the law
and, um, and at the moment they're constrained by the law
because people do have the right
to challenge an unfair decision.
Take that right away. They won't be constrained by the law.
And so we'll get us, get ourselves
into much bigger difficulty going forward.
Um, so at the moment there's a,
there's a quite a good balance.
Um, managers are constrained by the law.
Employees take the risk of litigation, um,
if they push their, um, push a a, um, a challenge too much.
And, and for that very reason, I think you'll find that, um,
professionals have a relatively low recourse to the, in, um,
to the employment institutions.
Now, you're probably aware that, um, safety systems, um,
rely on speaking up
and canor, so like airline pilots,
the medical profession has an obligation to basically say
what they observe, be very honest if,
if they've made a mistake, um, effectively report,
um, their colleagues, if their colleagues make mistakes.
And we think that, um,
so we basically operate a non-punitive regime in order to,
for the, for the best interest
of the total safety systems of the institution.
And we think that, um, not having the right
to challenge an unfair dismissal, um,
or if someone gets dismissed
because they've spoken up about a safety, um, safety system,
we just think that's gonna have a chilling effect on safety
system mechanisms.
Um, it's also worth noting,
and it was commented in the, um, the r at paragraph 22,
um, that the medical profession has different, different,
um, already has regulatory regimes
for managing their competence and performance.
And so we've got a very highly regulated regime
where people, the public colleagues, hospitals can report
our members to the medical council, um, if, if performance
or competency is an issue.
Um, and that's, and that's how that's managed.
So this, this, um, again, as the riz points out, this is,
uh, is an un an unnecessary intervention.
Uh, finally, um,
we represent members in a very highly competitive
international labor market experiencing severe workforce
shortages current, according
to health New Zealand current vacancy rates are between 12
and 14%, and they are as high as 40%.
In some regions like Gisborne,
where we've got 40% vacancy rates for senior doctors, um,
we've, we know from medical council information
that there's a very low retention rate, um, doctors
who come from overseas.
Now, 43% of our doctors in New Zealand at the MO registered
doctors at the moment come from overseas.
That's how international it is.
Uh, retention rates, um, are only 28%
after five years for overseas trained doctors,
and they're 85%
after five years for New Zealand trained doctors.
So we've got a very, we've got a very big
retention, uh, problem.
We think we can expect very negative labor market outcomes
if the cha these changes
to the 180 K limit are put into effect.
Basically people give up a job overseas,
sell up, come to New Zealand.
And, um, the added insecurity factor
that this would bring in along with a culture
of fire at will, um, is not an over,
is not an attractive prospect for someone
to basically take the risk of coming out to New Zealand.
Now, as is probably been pointed out
before, um, Australia, uh,
effective doctors in in Australia, um, are are all covered
by an award or an enterprise agreement.
And because of that, um,
the salary bar over there doesn't apply.
So Australia is our biggest competitor.
People make a decision between Australia
and New Zealand all the time when they come overseas.
This is just another nail, um, really
in making New Zealand a less attractive place to come to.
It was already, there's already a problem with the remu,
the remuneration difference.
Now we've got a security of employment difference, um,
and we just think this will just make Australia
more attractive than New Zealand.
I think that's all I wanted to say. Uh,
Right. Thank you
on this. Are there any questions?
I'll jump in with a question then, Paul.
Um, how can you say that it's, um, not possible to have, um,
individual, um, conditions apply when, um, doctors
who start, um, when they start their, um,
their positions have the ability to,
and then, um, that has effectively created a situation
where we have both a standard threshold
and then, um, individuals which has been part of the, um,
pay gap, the gender pay gap
that your own association has published about,
which is significant, one
of the largest in the New Zealand workforce.
Yeah, so, so the an IEA for a doctor consists of,
consists of two things really
that consists an i an individual, um, employment contract
for an doctor consists of two, three things.
The start date, the salary step that you're gonna start on,
um, and your FTE, you know,
whether you are part-time or full-time.
All the rest of the conditions are absolutely standardized.
And even before we had collective employment agreements,
they were standardized and common core conditions.
But that's not true because some people you've,
because you guys have unhooked time from,
um, from actual pace.
So you can have somebody who starts on 1.3
or 1.4 FTE, um, rather than, uh,
or one person I know is on 2.3.
So, you know, that is, that might be, um, you might say
that you've got, um, collective agreements,
but you've got massive variation between each departments.
Um, because effectively people are on individual agreements.
Um, and,
and as for, um, being, um, not not being able
to have power, doctors within our system have significant
amounts of power and the inability to get rid of people
and have to go through an HDC process
and a medical council process.
Um, and the abil the inability to get rid of, um,
ineffectual and incompetent doctors
is holding back our country.
Anyway, that's all we've got time for.
Thank you very much toward that.
You make some mistaken statements there about,
about individual correcting.
It's the individual contracting that does gender pay gaps
and we've, we've negotiated a clause into our collective
agreement gender inequality, which,
which hold up by Health New Zealand at the moment.
So just bit of, bit of in inquiry information there.
Well, it's, it's not working, is it? Okay, thank you.
Right. We've got, who have we got next?
Um, I think we've got retail NZ next.
Hi Anne-Marie, we've got, um, 10 minutes with uh, yes,
10 minutes with you this morning.
Um, thank you very much.
Um, and um, where have we got the right people actually?
Yes, you do. Yes, Yes we do.
We just got different names
from who I thought we were getting.
Thank you. Um, thanks very much.
We've got 10 minutes with you
and um, that includes time
for questions if you want to go ahead.
Yes, Kira. Um, yeah, we were due to be joined
by Carolyn Young, our chief executive,
but um, unfortunately she can't make it.
So I'm Ed Marie Johnson
and I'm efficacy manager for, uh, retail NZ.
And I'm joined by,
Um, my name is Yevgenia Chi and I'm the business
and HR advisor at retail NZ.
Thanks. Um, and thank you for this time.
Um, so if we can ma just make our, um, overall comments.
Um, in general we are supportive of the intent of this bill.
Um, we believe that, that it improves flexibility
and will reduce compliance costs for employers
and brings a more balanced grievance processes.
Um, there are a few adjustments that we want to suggest.
Um, and so if I turn to our particular points, um, first off
around personal grievance remedies, um,
we support the changes that are put forward in the bill.
Um, we believe these will increase fairness
and accountability and stop
through rewarding employees bad behavior.
Um, for, um,
and it's especially important for SMEs, uh,
to avoid liability when, um, misconduct
by the employee is evident.
Um, and as long as the employer has made genuine efforts
to act in good faith,
and certainly we believe most of our members, uh,
would fit into that category, um, minor process faults
that don't disadvantage the employee shouldn't be penalized.
Um, when the employee has clearly engaged in misconduct, um,
we would recommend that the bill, uh, includes
more clear definitions of what serious misconduct would be.
Um, there is case law, um,
and guidance from the likes
of the Employment New Zealand website.
Um, and so we would recommend incorporating some of
that guidance into the bill to further clarify
what is meant by serious misconduct.
So we are talking about things like violence
or threats of violence, theft, fraud, gross negligence,
negligence of health and safety requirements and so on.
Um, and then
any, well,
we need some more clarification on related claims
or damages that might still be available
to employees if they find themselves in this situation.
For, for example, if an employee is found
to have minimized serious misconduct and is
therefore ineligible, oh, sorry.
If an employee is found to have committed serious misconduct
and is therefore ineligible to receive, um,
I'm justified dismissal by dismissal.
Um, it's not clear
to us whether they may still pursue other claims such
as discrimination or hurt and humiliation
or breach of contract.
Um, so just, um,
offering some more certainty on those points we think
would be useful.
Um, on the wage threshold for,
um, personal grievances, um,
we are generally supportive,
but um, we do have some concerns around, um,
naming the 180,000 base salary.
Um, we believe it could lead to unintended consequence,
um, where employees are perhaps on the same wage
but with different responsibilities.
Um, so we would suggest aligning the threshold
with the 95th percentile of earners to ensure
that it applies to workers
who genuinely hold significant bargaining power.
Um, and then that would lead to fewer complexities
and imbalances in the workplace.
Um, we also suggest that, uh, bonuses
and allowances are included in the income calculation.
Um, and that's to avoid gaming the system so that um,
any employee who might be earning the equivalent of 180,000
can't, um, get out of this by, um,
transferring some of their earnings into, um, bonuses
or other rewards.
Um, and we also suggest
that high earners should be excluded from collective
agreements and then that underlines with the align
with the underlying principle
that these workers have enough
bargaining power on their own.
Um, the next point why you wanted to raise was
around, um, collective agreements
and you, do you wanna jump in here?
Yes. Um, yeah.
We're basically in support of the changes to the rules
around collective agreements.
Um, firstly the 30 day rule, um, that creates a lot
of administrative
and bureaucratic complexity for employers
where you have someone coming on under one, um,
set of terms and conditions.
There have to be a lot of manual.
Um, for most of our members it's a quite a manual process
to convert someone to a different employment agreement, um,
after they've already started.
And also this effectively negates, um, the current, um,
30 day rule basically negates the use
of 90 day trials in those workplaces
because obviously if the individual agreement
with the 90 day trial clause isn't signed
before starting work, then it cannot be valid.
And so we think that this is a much more balanced approach
where if employers provide both the collective
and the individual to the employee
before they start work, that employee still knows
that they have the right to join the union.
They know exactly what those terms and conditions will be
and they have a chance to review those terms
before they start, um, so that when they actually start,
both the employee and the employer know exactly what terms
and conditions are applicable.
And, uh, further to that, with regards to the requirement
for employers to pass on certain information from a union
to their employees, we think that this is,
um, kind of unnecessary.
Our members feel
that there are union delegates in the workplace, um,
where there's a collective agreement in place.
Those delegates are more than capable
and indeed it's their role to liaise.
Um, with between the union and the employees.
They're more than capable of providing any information
to new starters or if new starters express a desire
for their information to be passed on the union, they can do
so through, um, either the delegate or on their own.
So there's really no reason why the employer should be
required to be the middleman there, as long as they've
properly informed the employee that a union, um,
presence is there and that they, um, have the right
to join the CEA.
I think that that's are our key points.
So I'm happy to take any
Questions.
Thank you very much. Um, it doesn't look like we have,
um, any questions for you?
Appreciate, um, your time, um, this morning
and um, have a good rest of your day.
Thank you. Thank You. Thank you.
Um, so we've got Jennifer, no, Jennifer,
um, Haki, is that the next person?
Yes. We just bringing her in now. Yeah. Great. Thank you.
Okay. Um, so it looks like
Jennifer's having trouble linking.
Have we got Warren, um,
from the Small Passenger Service Association?
I think he popped up before.
Looks like Jennifer's just managed to make it in.
She'll just need to unmute and turn the camera on. Okay.
Hi Jennifer. Um, I'm So sorry. Welcome to,
That's alright. Welcome to the
committee. We have five minutes with you,
including time for questions if there are
any. Um, go ahead.
Um, you already have my submission,
but this is just a summarize for mm-hmm.
Submission. Um, thank you.
So, um, I'm a lecturer at MIT, uh, so this is, um,
my perspective anyway.
Um, my position is I oppose the Employment Relations
Amendment bill in its current form, the erosion
of good faith protections.
The Bill weakens employees duty to act in good faith,
especially in dismissals by raising the bar for fairness
and reducing accountability,
anti collective bargaining measures,
removing a 30 day rule in union onboarding,
weakens union visibility
and access to representation from day one.
This undermines collective bargaining
and workers solidarity.
It echoes past reforms
underneath the John Key 2008 2017 government,
which ODed workers' rights under the guise
of labor market flexibility.
The introduction and expansion
of the 90 day trials weakened your rights chances
to collective bargaining rules
and reduce access to grievance procedures.
The idea was that increased flexibility would use help
business grow and adapt, but in practice, many
of these reforms lead to greater job insecurity,
weakened worker protections,
and a rise in precarious employment, especially for young
and low income workers, which are mainly women.
Uh, now it's called Growing for Growth.
The current bill continues that trend,
prioritizing employer convenience over working protection.
This is yet another attempt to weaken unions,
isolating workers, making them easier to dismiss
and less able to challenge unfair treatment.
It fosters a culture where fear replaces fairness
and silent feels safer than speaking up
unjustified dismissal threshold.
The bill continues a patent seen under the John Key
Government where reform shifted power towards employers,
removing trial protections, weak unions,
and limiting grievance
and rights through, though framed as promoting flexibility.
These changes led to a greater job in security
and precarious work, especially for women.
The low and low, the young and low income workers.
The new salary threshold mirrors
that approach excluding high earners from dismissal
protections and aligning with the pay equity bill,
which restricts claims
and removes pay back, pay Together these reforms, access
to justice, particularly for women and vulnerable workers
and normalized inequality, the message is clear.
Those who earn more expected to tolerate more,
even if unfairly dismissed.
This undermines the principle of equal protection
and discourages workers from speaking up,
knowing their legal options are shrinking.
Contractor classification risks.
The new specified contractor category puts apprentices
and vulnerable workers at risk.
Many are already treated as expendable.
Last on first off, with little support.
This bills allows employers to reclassify them
as contractors, stripping away central protections like sick
leave and grievance rights without strong safeguards.
This opens the door to exploitation.
All workers, including apprentices, deserve support
and support and secure employment, not precarious contracts
that leave them exposed and unprotected.
Is this an attempt to bring overseas workers without
addressing existing unemployment here
or being held accountable for?
That's just a question. Human rights
and equity concerns, the bill undermines natural justice
under the new Human Rights Act and Employment Relations Act.
At this point, it makes, it affects those in insecure roles.
Apprentices, part-time low income income workers,
widening inequality, misuse of serious misconduct.
To deflect employee accountability,
the bill relies on serious misconduct without defining it.
This opens the door for misuse, allowing employees
to dismiss workers for raising legitimate concerns.
For an example, and I know of a case, uh, apprentice,
apprentice points out to Paul Training.
They could be fired. They have been fired
instead of being supported.
That's not fairness. It's the fiction
of employees and competence.
Strategic risk, risk Combined Impact, or VAT system
and Employment Relations Amendment bills
alongside the VAT system amendment bills.
This bill shifts power from public institutions
to private interest industry.
School boards may lack NZQA oversight,
risking inconsistent training quality.
Will employees be qualified to teach?
Will they support literacy and numeracy,
or will funding shift from public politics
to private providers reinforcing a profit over people model.
Together these bills remove public safeguards.
Education becomes transactional, not transformative.
Employment becomes precarious, not protected.
Oversight weakens
and worker employ empowerment is replaced by employer
convenience recommendations.
Rejectable in its current form retain the 30 day rule in
union onboarding requirements
to submit collective bargaining.
Remove the income threshold for unjustified dismissal claims
to ensure equal protection under the law, clarify
and safeguard contractor definitions
to prevent exploitations, uphold good faith obligations
and ensure procedural fairness.
In all dismissal cases, uh,
I oppose the employment relations
and memory. I knows current form.
Great. Thank you very much. That's, um, we've met time.
Thank you for your time this morning.
Oh, thank you. Thank you. Well done.
Oh, I know about that, but I appreciate
your patience. I seriously
Oh, thank you. Thank
you very much. And we've got Warren
next from the small business, uh,
small Passenger Service Association.
Good morning, Warren. Um, we have 10 minutes with you,
including time for questions. Um, the time is yours.
Good morning. Uh, and thank you for the opportunity
to address it, Timothy today.
My name is Warren Quirk, uh,
and I'm the Executive Director
of the Small Passenger Service Association, formerly known
as the New Zealand Taxi Federation.
We represent small passenger service
companies from across New Zealand, including taxi companies
and shuttle organizations.
The Small Passenger Service Association supports the
intention of the bill to provide clarity
between employees and contractors.
By far and away, almost a hundred percent
of our member company drivers are contracted drivers.
Many belong to cooperatives or franchise organizations
and have financially invested in belonging to them.
They all have, uh, contractor type arrangements in place,
and these have been in place for many years.
There are very few employed drivers in the industry.
If a company does have an employed driver,
it would normally be in a specific company contract
where the driver is providing a constant running service,
such as transporting the likes of airport staff to
and from the terminal and entire parking services.
I would like to point out and,
and raise about the proposed amendments
and the Employment Relations Act bill
regarding the gateway test,
and in particular, uh, around control drivers who partner up
or join to business with our member companies embrace the
point that company has control.
They see training across the all drivers
to ensure high standards
and enhancing the brand image
as increasing their financial investment.
The gateway test should not be misinterpreted
as an employment light control,
where both parties are building a business
and collaboratively building on good will.
The proposed gateway test suggest to be passed
as a contractor and not be an employee.
The contractor should not, should, should be free to work,
uh, to work outside of the company.
The sa as long as they work it the same
nature if they wish to.
This shows against all current company
and franchise agreements.
Being able to, uh,
apply your trade elsewhere becomes problematic
as drivers will effectively be trading on the good world
created by the company and franchise.
There is real risk of brand damage by not having oversight
or control of the drivers.
Another amendment or, uh, regarding control is companies
and franchise need to have the elements of control
and often have to roster, have rosters in place
to fulfill contracts.
It not should not be forgotten in a small passenger services
part of the public transport service.
Companies need to roster ensure services for the likes
of totem mobility are maintained.
If you didn't have a set roster for to mobility in regards
to wheelchairs and that type of service,
the service would cease to operate for those users.
Drivers would just simply choose to work nine to five
and take their easy hours.
Um, so it, it just simply won't work in that regard.
Um, again,
I reiterate drivers partner up and go into business
and invest financial invest in OP
and franchise organizations On a
driver contract basis.
The S-P-S-A-S-P Compression Services Association agrees
that contract employment relations, um, needs
to be redefined.
Um, we would suggest explicitly accounts
for legitimate businesses that is jbo test specific accounts
for legitimate business models like franchising,
where a degree of control and standardization is inherent
and deserves by
and desired by both parties distinguishes
between control imposed by companies commercial choice
and control, dictated by legal
or regulatory obligations such as safety
and consumer protection laws, contractual arrangements
with public transport providers, that the compliance
with the law is not wrongly held against firms
and spans the gateway road test
or provides further guidance to ensure a broader range
of industries can rely reliably use it,
including those involved in reasonable
non-competent clauses, necessary schedule requirements
or other standard contractual terms
that do not undermine the workers' independent status.
Thank you.
Great. Um, do we have any questions? Doesn't look like it.
Thank you very much for your time, Warren.
Appreciate your submission
and, um, your presentation this morning.
Thank you. All right.
Um, so, um, the next person we have is, um,
do we have Brody Karcher?
Yes. We're just bringing them in now. Great.
Good morning Brody. Um, thanks and welcome to the committee.
Uh, we have five minutes with you.
Uh, you can take your submission as read if you like.
Um, but go ahead, um,
and include some time for questions if you want to. Thanks.
Great. Thank you Koto.
Thanks for your time and efforts on this committee
and for hearing my oral submission today.
As I said in my written submission,
I strongly oppose the employment relations Amendment Bill,
and I urge the select committee
and the government to abandon this bill.
There are many aspects of this bill that deeply concern me.
I think all of them could be summed up as being ways
to whittle away the rights of workers, employees, citizens,
and to increase the power of those
who already have too much influence in workplaces,
our society and our politics.
That is corporations or businesses, especially large ones.
Six parts to the bill and each one concerns me
and gives me another reason to ask you to recommend
that this bill is dumped.
The first part defines a statutory class of worker
as a contractor and reduces the rights of this new category
of worker to only some very basic employment protections.
Who does this serve? Not the majority wealthy
and not the poor, to already have the most power
in the employment environment?
Even more power workers will suffer the consequences of this
and lower paid workers will likely suffer
more when workers suffer.
Our communities suffer the second part of the bill
of tax personal grievance rights.
Any move to reduce the ability of workers
to use the personal grievance process to attempt
to address being treated unfairly
or to being dismissed must be avoided.
It's already very difficult to use this process
and the outcomes when successful are often unsatisfactory.
It's extremely concerning to me
that an employer could potentially merely indicate
that a worker had contributed to a situation
and this could dismantle the employee's case.
This is patently ridiculous.
And these situations, it could almost always be argued
that the employee had contributed in some way or other,
but that should not remove their right to justice.
This is victim blaming.
Me's advice is that this bill's rationale to
re tilt the personal grievance system has weak
or no evidence that supports it being necessary.
It's also maddening to me that all workers who happen
to earn overnight over an arbitrary dollar amount,
lose their rights to personal grievance claims altogether.
This is what the third part of the bill does.
This will likely make it even harder for Aldo
to attract valuable workers from overseas that we need,
including doctors.
Why would we want to do this?
I fear this bill is an attempt
to move New Zealand towards an employment, uh, environment,
more like that in many parts of the United States,
where employers often have fire at will rights while on its
own, the bill won't fully achieve this,
it certainly moves in that direction,
at least for some workers.
And this is entirely negative
for the vast majority of people in this country.
Let's not do it.
The fourth part of the bill seeks
to further reduce the influence of unions
by removing the requirement for employees
to start new employees on the terms
and conditions of an existing collective agreement.
Where there is one, this attack is another step backwards
and will likely mean that our pain conditions
will continue to fall further.
Behind those, across the Tasman
where the union movement maintains more strength,
this ought not be desirable for any member of parliament.
Further reducing employees rights under their,
during their 90 day trial periods is
what the fifth part of this bill does.
No decent employer needs these trial periods
and this part of the bill reduces the
accountability of employers.
While an earlier part
of the bill increases the accountability expected
of workers, this is wholly unfair.
And finally, part six of the bill weakens the protections
that employees have from an unjustifiable
actions and dismissal.
It's clear that those who propose this bill are determined
to remove workers' rights.
That every opportunity, I'm deeply concerned about
how this bill will undermine many fundamental workplace
rights that all workers deserve.
As I said in my written submission, there's no good reason
to implement this bill and to do so, we'd only benefit those
who already have too much power in our society
and in our workplaces at the expense of those
who have too little voice but deserve so much more.
Yet again, the bill has proposed
that we'll have the worst negative outcomes
for vulnerable workers and those in precarious work,
including many Maori Pacifica, young people, immigrants,
those with disa, those with disabilities and women.
I implore of a select committee
to abandon this terrible employment relations amendment.
Bill. Thank you.
Sorry, va. Vanessa, you just were
on mute. Was that for me?
Yes. Sorry. Yes, go ahead Jan. Thanks.
Hey, bro, just on the 30 day coverage, can you explain
why 30 day coverage in your opinion, is important
for the protection of the workers coming in?
Yeah, I think it's really important
because so often, uh, people don't know
that there is a collective agreement
or that there is a union active in a workplace.
And anything that's done to make it harder for workers
to know about their work rights
and to know about the existence
of unions in their workplaces is negative
for workers and for unions.
And I think this is, this could have a really negative
effect on the ability of unions to organize workers,
and that's always bad for workers and communities.
Great. Great. Thank you very much.
Uh, we've met time there
and appreciate your, um, your time this morning, Brody.
Thank you. Cheers. Bye. Me
Okay, members. Um,
so we are scheduled to have a break for, um, 10 minutes.
Um, so we'll see you back at 10 past 10.
It's 10 past, so welcome back members.
Hopefully Mike's there at some point.
Um, and we have, um,
the New Zealand Professional Firefighters Union.
Um, we've got Whattie there.
Yes, good morning. Great.
Good morning. Thank you very much.
Um, we have 10 minutes with you this morning.
Um, you can take your submission as read
and um, if you want to leave time for questions
during your presentation, that'd be great.
Um, the time is yours.
Thanks very much for this opportunity
and for those of you that are waiting through hundreds,
if not thousands, I don't know of submissions on this.
And I think that really, um, the breadth of the types
of people, and I've been having a look at some of the, uh,
video as well as submissions tells you across the board
how dangerous this piece of legislation will be.
Uh, I represent, uh,
the New Zealand Professional Firefighters Union.
So we represent almost a hundred percent
of all career firefighters in New Zealand.
Uh, the trainers, the one one one emergency, uh,
call center, uh, dispatchers, uh, volunteer support officers
that support all the volunteer brigades and,
and a plethora of other people that work in f as well.
And our members predominantly put their quality
and quantity of life on the line to support their community
and they work in really, uh,
robust situations on the incident ground.
But they also work in a, a public sector organization
that hasn't, is notorious for its problems in terms
of dealing with workplace issues fairly and reasonably.
And the imbalance of power
that is inherent in every employment relationship
is magnified when someone has an issue in the workplace.
When they're trying to raise it, generally they're trying
to raise it to make it stop or to improve the workplace.
And there are times also when employers need to raise issues
with the workers as well.
The premise of a fair
and reasonable workplace is nothing we should be afraid of
or run away from.
If the process in which you can raise issues,
whether your employer or employer can raise issues,
whether you are fair, what's likely
to be the outcome is a sustainable
and reasonable outcome
that will actually address the underlying problems rather
than attack the individuals as the troublemakers.
It's really bizarre to think
that in New Zealand there is an intention that regard
that it's dependent on what you earn as to
what rights you have in the workplace.
And I assure you that the most people in New Zealand
that earn the 180,000 as their salary are in management
and they and themselves will not be able
to negotiate back into those rights and conditions.
It is a false view of reality.
If you think that employers are going to, uh,
negotiate a right where they can basically dismiss at will.
And if those middle managers, uh, have no access to fear
and reasonable rights, imagine
how then they're gonna treat the
people that they're managing.
And below, I just wanna, uh, talk to you about the reality,
uh, in particular of taking personal grievances.
It's already really tough to do.
In fact, very few people ever take a personal grievance
because they have to have the resources, the stamina,
and the ability to do so.
Firstly, if you have an issue in the workplace against
another work pla work member, uh, your a colleague,
it's only a personal grievance when the employer hasn't, uh,
has been notified of the issue
and they haven't dealt with it properly.
So many people don't even understand that, that a lot
of your internal employment problems aren't addressed
through personal grievances.
It's only when the employer has the ability to resolve it
and to address it that it becomes in personal grievance.
And if they had properly addressed it,
it probably wouldn't have got to the extent it does.
And so, uh, if someone's gonna take a personal grievance,
for example, for unjustified action, I'll get
to dismissal in a minute.
They have to have the courage to do so.
It's extremely brave to do so.
Very few of them have the resources to do so
unless they're a member of a union
and the union's willing to support them
or they have someone else with the ability
and knowledge to support them.
Though often the employer then
ostracizes them in the workplace.
They are felt isolated.
They are not given the same rights
and, um, conditions they've tried.
Their contracts are breached, they're made to do extra work
or different work or in a different
way and a different place.
Uh, and that in itself deters anyone else
from speaking up in the workplace.
Unjustified dismissal is an absolute fundamental right.
You must be able to have genuine access
to contest your dismissal.
The right to work absolutely underpins almost everything in
our community and in our families.
If we have the, if we lose the right to work in a fair
and reasonable workplace, which includes a safe workplace,
then all we are doing is driving skilled, educated,
driven people into unemployment.
It is very hard to get another job when you have
to say on your CV
or when asked that you were dismissed from the last
and particularly whether or not you contributed or not.
Now, very few things happen in isolation
and we notice even with our membership,
if someone has done something, uh, out of the norm and
and not acceptable,
then looking at the full circumstances often sheds light to
what has actually occurred.
And that's what should happen.
That's the process that that should happen
to understand why something happened.
There will be times when someone has committed misconduct
and or serious misconduct
and dismissal is run one
of the remedies in those situations,
but it shouldn't be the go-to
and it shouldn't be irreversible if it was unfair.
In our case, our members often have mental health problems.
They are, we have 84% of our members in a survey
that have shown that they have been exposed
to a traumatic event within the last month or two.
Now, that's a huge impact.
We have firefighters that are re reusing people, children,
babies, teenagers committing suicide three or four times.
Um, in a, in a shift cycle,
humans aren't designed to sustain that.
Something will break.
And often it is a frustration
or a way in which they react to a situation
or someone else that they're just really,
'cause they're at their wit's end.
That would be contributory, right?
And under this law, they would be able to be sacked
and have absolutely no remedies, no right to training,
no right to mental health treatment.
No, right, to some economic, uh, relief
until they can find perhaps something else to do,
which highly likely they're not going
to be able to find anything to do.
This bill will place lots of our valuable, productive,
good workers on the scrape for a long time.
And if you work in the public sector, you have
to even say whether you've been investigated
before you go for another public sector job.
Not that just that you've been dismissed
or disciplined, that you have been investigated.
And we see time and time again,
they're not employed as a result.
So I just want everyone to really think
what is the problem we are trying to solve here?
If you think there is some wild situation
where people are being paid extraordinary amounts of money,
and employers are being forced to reemploy people
that should never be in the workplace, I I ask you
to give me the evidence for that.
The media focus on the most extraordinary cases,
but they're not actually sitting in the hearing
room listening to it.
They're just picking up the decisions.
And the decisions by their nature,
particularly in the employment relations authority,
are very brief and to the point on the tests of law.
So you have this false assumption
that there are people out there
where small businesses are being required to pay big money
for people that they should have been able to sack.
Well, the question is, did they
go through the right process?
More often than not, had they gone
through the right process, a sustainable fear
and reasonable outcome would've resulted.
There's other issues in here, uh,
that are really telling on the attack of workers.
And if you attack unions, you're attacking workers.
Unions are the workers.
And many, many people have never had contact
with a union before.
So when they will go into a workplace
and they're told he's a union contract,
they get the protections of those hard earned
and fought terms and conditions that have been crafted
and struck for,
and worked for, for probably 30, 40 years in some cases.
And that gives the benchmark in that workplace.
Now, the employer can negotiate individual terms
and conditions or different terms and conditions with them.
That's, that's always been available.
But where does ever an employer really ever say to you,
I wanna give you what you earn and I wanna give you more,
and this year I wanna give you more.
'cause everything's going honky dory.
The world is tough and it's tough for business
and it's tough for governments and it's tough for workers.
This act will only drive wages lower,
which will affect the economy hugely.
And you will drive really good, productive,
educated train workers out of this country.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, very quick question, Dan.
Yeah. Hi whatI.
Hey, just on the, you were talking about, um, conditions
that workers face.
So are you saying that sometimes the job is causing issues
and rather than the employers responsibility of wrapping
around and ensuring that
that person's got the right support, this is an easy way
to get rid of those employees even though the
job has caused the issue?
Absolutely. We said a lot and,
and obviously first responders,
but even in friends across others, there's um, now
vember research that shows organizational stress,
which is different to the impact of being exposed to trauma,
has just as much of an impact as being exposed to trauma.
So, and that is where people are raising issues in the
workplace, such as the, having the right tools and equipment
and uniform and training
and whatever to do their job when they don't have that.
Um, not only has there perhaps di consequences, uh,
when they need those in a, in a incident for example,
but it has huge ramifications within the workplace
and their, uh, the stress within the workplace.
And when that culminates, what
that in culminates into is a really unhappy workplace
where people do, uh, make mistakes
and they do sometimes lash out.
Great. Thank you very much for that.
Um, we have no time. Cheers. Thanks
Jen. Bye-bye. Thank
you all everybody.
Bye. Uh, so next we have, um, John Ry.
Have we got him online? Sorry, Madam Chair.
We don't, but we do have the Dairy Workers Union.
If you, let's go for the Dairy Workers Union then.
Good morning, uh, Chris
and um, Jared, I think thank you very much, um, for coming,
um, on this morning.
We have 10 minutes with you.
Um, you can take your submission as read if you like,
and um, just highlight what you want
and, uh, if you'd leave some time for questions or not.
It's up to you. Go ahead.
Can't hear you. Can you take yourself off mute please?
Can you hear us now? Yeah, yeah. All good.
Sorry about that. Yep. Excellent.
Hey, thanks very much to everyone in the, uh,
committee for this time.
Uh, myself, uh, Chris Lat, national Secretary with me,
Jared Phillips, our general counselors.
You said you've seen our summary, uh, and our submissions.
Look, I just want to do, leave some time for questions
'cause that's the most important.
But I did wanna give a, just a little bit update
'cause a number of, uh, people
who read the DW submissions may not realize we are
not on farm.
We are predominantly in the processing sector.
Uh, and we have 8,700 members right across
provincial and rural New Zealand.
It's our membership that is in small town New Zealand
that a lot of National Party mps will have members.
Uh, we are very different in that sense.
These changes will, uh,
and have caused a huge concern amongst members in a lot
of national party areas.
Darfield site, dun Sand,
but Women Field, Blen Road in your own electorate, Vanessa,
uh, pa, uh, Mike, others, the our members, uh,
cover right across the political spectrum
and they just, the feedback we've had is this is
just not necessary.
These changes are ideological
and don't reflect the actual work, uh, workplace
or the relationship we have in the deer industry
with employers, for example.
Um, we, uh, live
and breathe the high wage, high skill economy.
We don't put a label on it, we just do that.
We've been in the industry for 85 years
and we have positive relationships with Fonterra
Slay Yli y Danone, right across the industry.
And in our view,
these changes aren't just going to hurt our members.
They're actually gonna hurt existing dairy employers.
And our real concern is a real race to the bottom,
particularly around the 30 day rule.
And the contractors. I've heard some
of the earlier submitters, they've talked a lot about the
PGS in those other areas
and the, uh, in that area, we really want
to concentrate on the impact that 30 day rule
and contractor changes have for us.
We find that that 30 day rule not only gives us an
opportunity as a union to talk to new workers coming in,
but from an administrative point of view for employers,
it's deeply supported by employers in the deer industry
because it means that when we have inductions
and processes, everyone knows what the terms are,
everyone knows what the conditions are, union
and management can meet with new workers.
We have a serious concern that's going
to change under the removal of the 30 day rule.
And as much as other submitters talk about the freedom
of ias, our experience with some new players
who had came into this industry when the old John Key
government had removed the 30 day rule
was employers sitting at the table
throwing an IEA on the table,
throwing the collective on the table,
saying under law can show you both of these
and you need to be aware of them.
But making it very clear that people would not have a future
at that work site if they signed the collective.
The 30 day test takes that right off the table.
It means that everyone is upfront knows what's going on,
what is happening, and then
after 30 days, if a worker feels they're better represented
on their own or want an IEA give them that opportunity,
still freedom of association.
This is a step too far.
And as I said before,
our members right across Provincial New Zealand are
wondering what's the fault
and harm that needs to be changed with this 30 day test.
The other area I do want to just quickly raise
before I hand over to Jared and,
and to questions is the contractor change.
We have deep concerns about that in the dairy industry.
We have appropriate limits on contractors
that both parties agree to.
That means that through the flush period there is, uh,
ability for employers to bring in contractors.
But outside of that key period,
there's a limit on contract labor that's vital
for both employers to have the flexibility they need
through peak times, but also for workers to transfer
what is a seasonal job into a full-time
permanent year long job.
We don't want to go like other parts
of the primary industry, which sees workers
churned out at the end of the product season.
You only have to look at pip fruit or agricultural
or some in the parts of other non-dairy industry that see
seasonal labor churn and burn workers.
And then we have to rely on
overseas migrant labor, et cetera.
We don't have that experience in the dairy industry
because we've been able to transform our seasonal product
into a long-term job where people can be trained,
can settle, can have a career,
and can keep, uh, can keep in place.
So, uh, again, that is a real concern.
30 day rule contractors, I will just touch on it.
The moment the 180 k thousand limit, uh,
it won't be very far off.
We are a well paid industry
and we make no apologies for that
'cause our employers are doing very well.
And through our union negotiations, uh, that's shared
amongst workers appropriately, it's not far away that
that 180,000 cap will impact upon provincial, uh,
DW workers in some of your own very sites,
uh, uh, electorates.
So just be aware that that 180,000 might seem very high
for some people in the dairy industry.
It won't be far off.
And that that's a, a real concern
that people won't have rights to personal grievances just
because they earn a certain amount of money.
I think we chose to encourage people to earn
and share in wealth, not lose rights as a result of it.
Um, open up we've minutes
if the committee have any questions in relation
to our submission or the unique position that we have
after being in the industry 85 years.
Yeah. It looks like we've got a question from,
Hey, Hey, Chris and Jared, good to see you.
Um, yeah, going back to that 30 days,
we've heard this morning from Business New Zealand that
that's an administrative burden on employers,
but from what you are saying, that seems to be something
that your employers like.
Can you expand on that a bit more please?
Yeah, look, we, our, our view
and our feedback has been that,
that it would be a bigger administrative burden not
to have the 30 day rule.
Because when we have in our industry a very clear cut
position that workers come into the industry,
everyone knows what the terms are.
We've got high union density, high union membership,
not only on Fonterra but across a number of other sites.
It's gonna cause a huge amount of payroll
and administrative, um, expense
to employers in the dairy industry.
And I would suggest that would be across many other
industries such as the red meat industry,
which is highly unionized across, uh, pit fruit,
which is quite unionized,
where you've got these high levels of membership.
Getting rid of the 30 day rule gonna be a massive
administrative burden on employers at the moment.
It allows us to say, here's a new worker,
here's the collective, there's freedom of association
as we know after 30 days,
but we would have the absolute opposite effect in the dairy
industry if we were to go down that path.
Um, we also find that means when new workers come in,
we can talk quickly about the productivity
and the other schemes that we are working
with the employer on
that show the positive working relationship between a union
and the DW and employers not go into rates
of pay fights over IAS versus collective bargaining.
And I just don't, this one is a,
it's a pro in answer looking for a problem.
It really is. I get
that the national government lead government will wanna make
changes in industrial relations.
I get it. I've been around
industrial relations for a long time.
I know there's changes, but the 30 day rule really doesn't
make sense for employers or for workers.
There's, so yeah, that would be our experience.
Jared, I if you've got some extra in that,
I'll just add in terms of that, um,
position there about administrative burden.
I think that that the, um, 30 day rule, um,
actually prevents a lot of, uh, burden
and disagreement
around access issues in the workplace as well.
That's very important for us
and other industries that are, uh, like us potentially.
But definitely for us, uh,
we have issues whereby we are respecting
and upholding food quality, hygiene issues
and those sorts of matters.
And so that means that sometimes there might be
not a prevention of access,
but there might be some discussions,
debates about access over red line hygiene
areas at particular times.
And the um, 30 day, um, rule is, is a way
that we can ensure these access, um,
to the collective agreement
for people when there are holdups on access within redline
critical hygiene areas and so forth.
So we think that it really limits that, that had,
that had been a significant sort of, uh, argument
for us in some situations, particularly
with new employers in the industry.
And that goes to that issue of the race to the bottom is
that we need, with the new employers, we need them to have,
we need workers in the
and amongst the new employers to have the same access
to collective agreement conditions
or else it's getting into that race to the bottom,
which we really striving hard to push back
On. And, and I want like
one final point
because we have very positive relationships with the bulk
of our employers and we,
we take a long-term view in this industry.
We've been in here 85 years,
we wanna be around for another 85.
We wanna make it more productive right at the time we have
the new, uh, the world's biggest dairy company in lack
elites coming into this country.
This government's talking about easing up cure protections.
If ever there was a time we could see a race
to the bottom in a critical industry that supports workers,
paid a lot of money into provincial New Zealand
where National Party MPS predominantly reside.
I don't think National mps,
you should be thinking on this one a little stronger.
I get the minister has a view on, on 90 day a 30 day rule,
but this will be your electorate, your sites
where we have really well paid members
who could be at a race to the bottom by one
of the world's largest multinational
that does not have a positive trade union experience
or worker rights experience.
We hope it's different when they come to, but it may not be.
And we don't want to see a race at the bottom.
And I tell you, employers in existence,
We have met time.
Thank you very much.
Team. Have we got, um, the, our next presenter?
Yes, it's coming now. Great.
Uh,
who have we actually got on?
'cause it's coming up as somebody else. Yeah,
We're just trying to clarify that.
We'll just need them to unmute and Yeah.
Uh, turn the video on and then we can see.
Okay.
Mute. Hello. Uh, good morning.
Have we got uhm
or, um, or who have we got here?
'cause of John Royal, John Royalle.
Uh, John Ryle. Okay. Alright.
Um, thank you John.
Uh, we have fire, uh, five minutes with you.
Okay. Uh, good morning everyone. Uh, Koto.
My name is John Royal.
Um, I've been representing
and advocating for low income workers
for probably about 40 years,
and one of the groups I'm currently working
with is the Uber drivers.
However, my submission is opposed to all
of the changes in this bill, which really, um, are going
to affect low income workers the most.
Um, just that, um, I, I'll just look at one of them first,
which is a 30 day rule.
When someone joins the workplace,
whether it's an existing collective agreement,
they can be employed on the minimum
of the collective agreement,
but they can actually also be employed on greater than that.
It's just they can't be employed on less than that.
And so the purpose of changing it is really
to lower wage rates for new employees in low income, um,
industries, their desperate for work.
And so if the employer says, I'm gonna employ you,
but rather than the collective agreement rate of, um,
$25 hour, it's gonna be $24 in hour,
then you'll probably grab it.
Uh, so that's on that point.
I think the 30 day roll is a race at the bottom with the,
um, uh, section six
and the, uh, which is specifically aimed at Uber drivers.
I think, I mean the risk for this, uh,
bill says there's only, um, there'll be 17 claims a year
for, um, people who say they're employees
and are actually, um, employed as contractors.
So it's a very low rate of people actually applying
to say there's something different.
And largely 64% of those is
because they don't have an agreement,
so they can't tell whether an employee
or a contractor, whatever they are.
Most of those ones it's clarified, are actually contractors.
What the danger is within setting a gateway test, um,
is you're actually putting in a definition of contractors,
which doesn't hold up.
A contractor is someone who's got their own business
and is building their own business.
It doesn't mention anything about this in their definition,
even though the courts have said
that a contractor is someone who's in
business on their own account.
What you've incorporated into that, um, definition is issues
that, um, casual workers could be employed on.
The only two things
that distinguish it from casual workers is one, having a,
in your contract, having the worst independent contractor,
and the second is being able to subcontract,
which is only an option, um, for one of the tests,
the risk could be covered by casual workers.
So I'm worried that the gateway test will lead to, um, more
and more employees being employed as contractors.
Um, I think I'm just still have some time for questions
because, um, you've read my submission.
No, that's all in there.
Great. Thank you so much for that, John. Um, Janti.
Well thank you. Thanks John,
and thanks for your submission.
Um, just wanna check with that as far
as the gateway test is concerned
and the employee employer, um, is there places,
and I I cannot bring your submission up at the moment,
but are there places in the world where, uh,
Uber drivers especially are treated as employees
rather than as contractors?
There's been, um, cases just
where every country in the world,
certainly in the OECD countries, uh,
where people have contested the um, with,
with about whether employees or contractors.
Most of those courts, um,
have said they're actually employees
because they were totally controls everything they do.
Um, in the UK for instance, um,
they're currently employed as workers
because the UK has a, um, has employees, contractors
and a group of workers and they're currently being paid
annual leave, minimum wage, all that stuff.
Um, the world hasn't fallen in,
they're still till on operating
And it hasn't stopped the industry
No. In Spain
and, um, Switzerland, same.
There's no, uh,
they just changed their model a bit. That's all
Right. Negotiate
flexibility into the uh, uh, with the union
that's representing the people.
Great. Thank you. That, that's interesting.
Thank you John. Looks like
that's all the questions that we have.
Um, thank you very much for your time this morning.
I appreciate you coming on and um, thank
You. I've got
also, um, here, there is, uh, me, Kyle,
and also Steve Ley from the Uber Drivers Network.
Okay. Um, So they'll just come up as
You'll come up next. Yep.
Great. Thank you for that.
Right. Um, team who is next?
Have we got, um, Mia Ollie Ke
Or No, there with, he's coming through now.
Oh, he is. Okay, great. Um,
Wonderful. Sorry, just
for the record, uh, everybody here seems
to get my name wrong. The,
Oh, I'm sorry.
Keel is, keel is KIEL.
Kyle is KEIL as in the Kyle House that was famous,
uh, sometime earlier on.
Please. Yeah. Thank, thank you.
And then, no, thank you very much. Do I start now?
Yes, please go ahead. We've got five minutes with you.
Yeah, thank you very much. I won't, uh, speak very much.
You know, my submission's already been given.
I'm one of those Uber drivers that, uh, took Uber to court
because of the unfair treatment to the employment party.
And then when we won that then decided to take us
to the appeal court of appeal, which is quite normal.
And that, and then we won the court, the Court
of appeal ruled in favor of us again, the drivers us
that we are not we're workers.
And now the decision now is in with the Supreme Court.
We awake the Supreme Court ruling.
Meanwhile here we have this
now being put through to us.
There's a, when I went through Maci in the 1970s
and going through the dawn raised,
and that one African friend of mine said to me, you know,
in Africa when elephants make love and war is the grass
and the, I am definitely not an elephant.
I'm definitely down there with the grass and that,
and as the elephants make love and war, we are think.
And today I believe it's very much that point.
We are crying for fairness in, uh, in the workplace, in
that, in the workplace who has all the power
and everything, the employer
in this decision that has been made.
And now all of a sudden we want a major review rights smack
while we're awaiting the Supreme Court,
the highest court in the land to make a ruling on the
issue about who we are at the workplace.
We have this now it then
I came to this country again to bring my family 2002
and there was the good faith, good faith in bargaining.
How do you determine good faith?
Is this good faith that we are going
through the courts trying to ask for justice and fairness?
And there we are having the parliament,
the political side now trying to change the law.
It definitely changed. Are you bargaining in good faith?
You bring this in good faith to this thing, to this land?
Or are we listening to overseas companies
and that are we determined by an independent,
I believe the count the Americans, it's come by the people
for the people and that, so where is that in this,
we have taken it to court.
We're waiting decision and here we are.
It appears it's a foreign company
that's now asking for the law change.
It happened during the John Key with the Hollywood people
and that, and now we're doing it again.
But at the end of the day, who suffers, who benefits
and who suffers with all the technical stuff.
And then we have families and that that suffer the kids
and everybody, these are the people that suffer.
They all result is that people try to earn a fair dollar,
fair buck to look after their families can't do that.
And then when you go, all the benefits are cut
and made out of reach.
Not one person has got the maximum apparently right there.
And then that's where the ads and the grass come in.
In order for the elephant today, whether they make love
or war, they tle on us.
When do we get a day to stand in the sun?
But then for all of us that have families,
this has repercussions
because your kids, our kids, my kids, your grandkids,
my grandkids will inherit this.
So all I ask is, fairness, be fair. Do what is right.
Wait for the courts, don't change the law. Thank you.
Thank you very much for that.
Um, do we wanna have the, we've met time with you.
Thank you. Um, if we bring the um,
Uber Drivers network, um, forward next.
Thank you.
Um, good morning Kalo.
Uh, my name's Steve, Phil, yeah, great.
From we've got 10 minutes with you,
we've got 10 minutes with you this morning.
If you wanna leave time for questions,
that'd be great. Thanks. Uh,
Yeah. Yep. I'm gonna read
from a speech
because I work extremely long hours, uh, for low pay
and um, I can't bring it from there to there to there, so,
so bear with me.
Okay. Um, my name is Steve Fairley
and I am here today to speak on behalf of members
of the first Union Wellington Uber Drivers Network.
I have worked in Wellington as an Uber driver
for a little over six years.
I choose to treat it as a full-time occupation.
In that time, I have been deactivated three times
without warning, instantaneously with no notice as to
what the offense is until receiving a message internally
through the app informing me that
I will no longer have access to the Uber app.
And I hope I enjoyed my time as a driver,
wishing me all the best for the future.
It's that easy. Sorry, you don't work here anymore.
They insist where individual contractors.
Yet in my own personal experience
and other jobs I've had as an individual contractor,
I have had way more rights than that.
There are usually warnings, verbal and written
before dismissal takes place.
My point here is there is no communication
and it is automatically decided what your fate will be
without having a chance to, uh, argue your defense.
Sure, you can usually get your account reactivated,
but that takes days if not weeks.
And in that time you have no ability to earn.
All of this causes unnecessary stress,
anxiety, and mental strain.
I'm at the point now where I am weary every time I log into
the app to start work for the day
that I will again be deactivated
and have my access to earning removed without any warning.
In my five years as a delegate of First Union Wellington,
Uber Drivers Network, I have heard of
and worked
with very many other drivers whose lives have
been affected in similar ways.
I have heard all countless unjustified accusations by Uber
untold unfair dismissal cases
and breaches of New Zealand employment law from a completely
automated system resulting in instant deactivation.
I even know of drivers who have suffered extreme ill health
caused by Uber and its unfair systems as well
as a driver being killed in a car crash in
Wellington earlier this year.
All we want is the ability to collectively bargain
for better rights and working conditions.
As of right now, we pay a 28% service fee
on every fare we complete with GST marked as exclusive,
but still taken out of the overall fare.
So before a trip even starts, we are down 43%.
We are responsible for all vehicle maintenance, insurance
and fuel costs, and are only paid
for the portion of the trip.
The passenger is in the car.
We are rated both by Uber and our passengers.
Everything is a manipulation. Nothing is upfront.
Everything is controlled by for Uber's benefit
through a process of algorithmic management.
Today I speak here collectively
and in unity with our 1100
national members on the proposed changes to section six
of the Employment Relations Act 2000.
We are aggrieved, we are angry
as we have been involved in legal action against our
employer, Uber and International Mega Corporation
with a net worth of over 300 billion New Zealand dollars
for nearly five years.
And this bill is designed to remove the rights we have won.
I say employer 'cause that is what we are by way
of definition, the employment court judgment of 2022
and the Court of appeal judgment of 2024 have both confirmed
that Uber is our employer.
As of now. We await the decision from the Supreme Court.
One would hope that we will be successful in that arena too.
Legal action by people who choose
to use the Uber platform is nothing new.
Uber have been unsuccessful arguing similar cases in very
many other countries in its short existence
and landmark rulings in the Supreme Courts
of the United Kingdom
and the Netherlands in 2021, as well as Switzerland in 2022
to name a few Uber, have been ordered by those courts
to classify their drivers as employees
or as John mentioned in the uk, um, case as workers
and to give them all the rights
and protections in accordance with those countries laws.
So I ask why should it be any different here in New Zealand?
This is why Uber never give up fighting against giving its
drivers any employment rights at all.
If they don't win in the courts,
they lobby political parties
who change the law in their favor.
We know that Uber have met with workplace relations minister
ironically on May the first 2024.
May the first is also known if you didn't know
internationally as mayday the date
of celebrating the right rights workers have won over
the last 200 years.
We know that these laws proposed
by Uber have been in part adopted by the government.
And this bill is set out in a recent report called The
Business of Misclassification by the Center
for International Corporate Tax Accountability.
I now quote from that report on page four ahead
of the Supreme Court hearing.
The government has introduced legislation
to restrict further challenges over
employment classification.
The proposed contract gateway test looks remarkably similar
to proposals presented by Uber when it met the Minister
for Workplace Relations and Safety on May 1st, 2024.
The report also goes on to show
that this giant overseas owned company
that the government has been trying to support
through this bill is adept at using its complicated business
structures to avoid paying the correct amount
of company tax in New Zealand internationally.
Every time Uber fails in the courts, they suggest
to those in power that there should be a third case case
class of worker, sorry,
outside the traditional classifications of employee
and contractor, do we want to pander
to overseas corporations to make it easier for them
to make money or to stick up for hardworking New Zealanders
who are currently earning a lot less than minimum wage
because of the nearly 50% cut Uber take for themselves.
A law change will only open the door to other companies
and corporations that see New Zealand as a soft touch
with politicians and lawmakers who are willing
to roll over at the expense of the local workforce so
that they can send larger amounts of money back
to their overseas tax havens.
In closing, the Wellington,
Uber Drivers network openly oppose any change in the law.
When we have come this close to legally proving
that we have been misclassified for so long,
we should be awarded all the rights
and protections in accordance with New Zealand law.
Not only because it is the right thing to do, but
because it is the democratic thing to do.
Thank you. Um, happy to answer any questions
Ti thank you and thanks Steve.
That was really powerful, um,
really enjoyed that submission.
Can you just tell me if there's any recourse
that you can have with Uber
and what that would look like if something's you feel
that you've been unjustly, unjustifiably,
excluded from the app, have you got any recourse
and how would that you go about that?
Well, there's a help and support network
that's within the app,
and then you contact that help and support network.
The thing is that Help
and support network is in either one of two places,
either the Philippines or India.
And then you are just, you're just in a merry-go-round of,
of trying to explain what your problem is.
Usually they just still say, sorry, you're still sacked.
Um, it, it, it takes, I've been involved in very many cases,
um, where, um, I, I've had to support, uh, my,
my fellow workers in, in getting, getting back online.
Um, traditionally Uber, like we,
we are talking about people from marginalized communities
that don't perhaps necessarily have the, the ability, uh,
or communication skills and
or English skills to, to deal with a a a,
a completely automated system.
Like I say, like everything, everything is automated
and everything is algorithmically managed.
So, so there aren't people here in New Zealand to help?
No, no. The general manager of Uber,
New Zealand lives in Australia.
Right, okay. Yeah. Okay.
There's no one here. Um, the, the,
the head office here is at 100 Morehouse Avenue in
Christchurch, and it's, um, probably a,
a a a a bricked up building who knows that,
but they don't have any, there's no one on the ground here.
They used to have people on the ground here, but,
but they withdrew, I think, uh, uh, prior to COVID, um,
maybe 2019, early 2020. Yeah.
Hey, hey. Thanks very much for your time.
Really appreciate, um, all of your, uh,
submissions this morning.
Helps, uh, good insight
and it helps us to understand
where you're coming from. Thank you.
Thanks heaps. Thank you. Cheers.
Okay, right team, have we got,
so we've got a, uh, now, uh,
about three individual submitters by the looks of it.
Have we got, um, any of those available?
Yes, we just bring Nick Helen now. Great. Thank you.
Um, Good morning Nick. Hello.
Um, welcome to the commercial.
Sorry, can't see you, but we can hear you.
Are you to turn your camera on?
I'm trying. Sorry about
that. How's,
That's better? We,
we have five minutes with you, um,
including time for questions.
Um, go right ahead.
Okay. Kiara Koto, Koto Koto.
My name is Nick Hillen.
I'm a final year social work student
and a future social work committed to social worker,
committed to social justice, fairness
and protecting human dignity.
I'm speaking in strong opposition
to the employment relations amendment Bill 2025.
As a student preparing to enter the profession,
I have been taught to value human rights
and to advocate for those who are most vulnerable.
I also bring personal experience having been
through disputes with past employers.
I know the stress imbalance of power
and vulnerability that workers feel when their livelihood
and dignity are threatened under this bill.
People in those situations would have even fewer protections
and in some cases, none at all.
This bill would allow remedies for personal grievances such
as compensation or reinstatement to be reduced to zero.
If an employer's behavior
or employee's behaviors deemed to have contributed,
who gets to decide that?
That's my concern. Um, that silence silences workers
and leaves them without justice.
It's, it will strip away the right
of people earning over 180 grand
to challenge unfair dismissal.
This would create a two-tier system
where higher earners lose their basic rights.
Just because somebody earns a certain amount
of money doesn't mean they shouldn't have
basic rights to recourse.
It would expand the use of contractor status,
enabling employers to deny workers' holiday pay,
sick leave rights, even when the reality
of their work is no different from an employee's.
We just heard from Uber as a, as, um, as an example.
Um, it would undermine unions by removing a 30 day rule
that ensures new employees benefit from
collective agreement terms.
These changes are not about fairness or balance.
They're about tipping the scales even further
toward employers and the wealthy.
They are, uh, they are part of a broader agenda
by this government to weaken human rights,
dismantle protections that have taken decades to build
and take Aldo backwards as a future social worker.
I know that employment protections are not just technical
legal rules, but part of the social fabric
that keeps families safe, community stable,
and workplaces fair.
By eroding these protections,
this bill would increase inequality, silence workers,
and place people at an even greater risk of exploitation.
My recommendations are
to re reject this bill in its entirety,
reinforce not reduce access to personal grievance.
Grievance remedies ensure that all workers, regardless
of income, retain their basic protections against unjust
dismissal, protect the integrity of employment
by preventing the misuse of contractor status
and strengthen, not weaken the
collective bargaining framework.
Um, and so in conclusion, I urge this committee
to reject the employment re relations amendment Bill 2025.
In its entirety, our employment law should protect people,
not strip them of their dignity
and rights. Thank you for your time.
Great. Thank you so much.
Uh, it doesn't look like we have any questions, so thank you
for coming to the committee this morning.
Okay, thank you. Um,
and do we have, um, Sean Monaghan next?
Yes, we do. Great.
Good morning, Sean. Welcome to the committee.
We have five minutes with you, you today, um,
including any time for questions.
Um, the time is yours. Go ahead.
Cool. Thank you very much. Uh, a k Kyoto
to the committee and its members.
Uh, my name is Sean Monaghan
and I thank you for giving me the
opportunity to present this morning.
Although today I'm officially presenting as an individual.
I'm also here to represent the everyday working class
and particularly those that are new to the workforce
and those that are entering into a job sector
with low levels of experience.
My submission will be relatively brief this morning
as I have only addressed a couple
of the changes proposed in this bill.
As you would've seen as part of my submission, I'm opposed
to both the removal of the 30 day trial, uh, sorry,
the 30 day rule and the removal of employers
to provide applicable union information to new employees.
These changes appear
to apply further downward pressure on the working class
people of New Zealand alongside other employment relation
changes, including cuts to sick pay, pay equity,
and the whole scale scrapping
or the fear pay agreements as someone that has been
through the process of new employment.
I know the type of pressure involved in trying
to secure employment there exists,
exists a set power imbalance in which the employer holds
power over new employees, especially those that are new
or inexperienced in the field.
This can be an isolating
and intimidating process when in reality it shouldn't be
the working class people of this country.
And what creates the skills
and resources to provide the society that we have.
We are collective and we are a community to make changes
that further individualize us.
While holding the power
as employers is a wholly unjustified approach
to the treatment of hard workers,
hard workers in New Zealand on a larger,
more longer term scale.
These changes seem to be part of, uh, sorry, seem to be out
of step with what the future holds
for industrialized countries.
As we know, neoliberal agenda
and its, I ideology has been around for over 40 years,
and what we have been seeing in the recent past is, is
that it's beginning to fall apart, in my opinion,
in comparison to what can be achieved when people feel part
of a union and a community are looked after and have jobs
and secured with livelihoods secured.
These last ditch neoliberal changes start
to look quite pathetic in my opinion.
Instead, we should be adjusting our workforce in the other
direction, providing security for people
so there can be comfort in society so people have access
to the adequate resources that they deserve.
And this begins with ensuring employment.
It is for these reasons that I believe the 30 day rule
should remain in place.
Giving employees an opportunity to experience
and understand what it is to be a collective of people,
to be united and working for each other
and instead of, sorry, working for each other, instead
of introducing bills like this that are attempt
to further tip the scales of power.
Uh, that is the end of my submission today.
Great. Thank you so much for that, Sean.
Um, have you got a very quick question,
Jan, please make it quick,
Quick question.
What would happen if that 30 day didn't hap wasn't there, if
that 30 day rule wasn't there, what would happen
to basically for young workers?
Um, so I believe if the information is not
provided, so we've got changes to the 30 day rule.
So which means that they're not automatically
set into the 30 days.
They're not given information about the union
that's available to them freely.
What we might see is that new employees, um,
enter the workforce as individuals when in fact they are
part of a collective workforce
and a community of, of collective workforce.
What I believe we may see is that
new individuals compromise on
what their worth is in the workforce due
to the power imbalance that's in place by new
between employees and employers.
Um, the knock on effect is
that they will accept essentially anything
that comes their way, which shouldn't be the case
for a workforce that holds this country up.
We've got large unions in place that, that have
provided for this country for long periods of time
to individualize these people as to further isolate them
and further put downward pressure on the working class,
which is a larger and larger majority of us.
So, um, I believe if the 30 day rule was removed,
then there will be further
and increased struggles for working class people.
Great. Thank you very much.
We have met time, Sean, appreciate you coming. Thank
You very much.
Amahi. Right?
Have we got our next presenter?
Yes, Bryce is just coming in now.
Great.
Uh, hi Bryce.
Excuse me. Sorry, Madam chair. Yes.
Tracy's taking over from me
and she's not being able to be let in at the moment
and I have to go, so I'm quite re be here.
Sorry. That's alright.
We just promoted her now. Great. Thank you.
See you. Thanks Jan. See you later. We got Bryce there.
Bryce. We can see a bee coming up,
but not ne Hey, can you say something
so we can check if we can hear you?
Can you hear me, Vanessa? Yes, we can. We can hear you.
Uh, can't see you yet, but hopefully that'll, um, change.
Yeah. Oh no, it is just a
Bee bee on my screen. But anyway,
Have you got a, have you, have you
turned your camera on Bryce?
Have I turned my camera on?
Ah, well I start my video. Let's have a look at that. Hello?
No, here
We are. Yes, there you go. Thank you. Right,
we have five minutes with you.
Um, Bryce, um, go ahead.
Um, and that includes time for questions.
Rightio. Okay. Uh, Kira, Kira,
uh, I'm Bryce Barley
and, um, I just, uh, the major points I've,
I've made on my submission are about Uber
and I've listened to those people talk
and they're very eloquent
and I, you know, the Uber drivers were ruled
by the UK Supreme Court in February, 2021 to be treated
as workers, and I think we should do the same.
The other point that I talked about was, um,
this bit about employer misconduct, um,
that there should be a balance at the moment,
the amend the bill just says that, um,
the grievous comp grievance compensation for workers
will be, uh, discounted if they, uh,
if it involves misconduct by them,
there should be a mirroring image if this bill goes ahead.
I don't think it should, but for employer misconduct,
and I join others in saying that the threshold
for unjustified dismissal, um, shouldn't be there.
Uh, there are people coming in, uh, to this country
who we need, who have higher salaries than that.
And, uh, it would be, have a chilling effect if they were
to face the effect that they might be dismissed.
The, uh, the 90 day rule is, uh, I have always referred
to it as the bad manager's rule.
Um, if you can't manage your, uh,
induction processes and your selection processes, uh,
and you, and this is what you, uh, have to rely on,
then you are a bad manager.
The, um, I, the 30 day one two,
I think should stay as it is.
And in backing up all of this, I
wonder why I make the global point that in the, uh,
according to the World Bank in the latest study, the ease
of doing business New Zealand is the easiest.
And so I wonder why anyone wants to make these changes.
New Zealand is number one ahead of Singapore, Hong Kong,
Denmark, and South Korea.
And it's just a conspiracy fiction that goes
around the internet about New Zealand being, um, full
of regulations when in fact we are the easiest country
to do business in.
And another fiction, which is unfortunate.
Um, and I got a right smile, Vanessa,
when you talked about the difficulty of firing doctors, uh,
when I was in the Navy, we, I had a, uh, officer working
for me who was, um, not competent.
Um, my commanding officer bet me
that I couldn't have him dismissed.
I went through the proper procedure through warnings,
and he was dismissed.
I should have taken the bet.
Um, it's, it's just a matter of being patient
and doing things properly according to the law.
And so, um,
but the difficulty of firing people is another one
of these conspiracy fictions that you find at,
uh, cocktail parties.
The, um, so my recommendation is
that this employer relations amendment bill be thrown out.
The government has much more important things to do, uh,
in the fields like child poverty, the health system,
taxation, research, incentives, far more important issues.
Let's not waste any further time on changing
what is currently working.
Well, thank you.
Thanks, Bryce. For some reason we lost the video
and appreciate your time and coming on.
It doesn't look like we have any, um, questions.
So appreciate you coming in and, uh, presenting. Thank you.
So thanks fea.
Um, so have we got the Young Workers Resource Center?
Uh, there, is that who we have?
Hi Kilda. Hi Kilda.
We have 10 minutes, um, with you, which includes,
um, time for questions.
Um, so the time is up to you.
Roach ua, um, called Nicola.
Um, uh, my name's Roach.
I'm the comms and Engagement Coordinator here at
Young Workers Resource Center.
And beside me, I have Nicola Paul,
who is our education coordinator.
Um, I'll be speaking
and Nicola is here to, to listen to talk
and also to learn how their submission process go.
Um, we're all about learning here at YWRC,
and we're gonna speak a little bit more about that.
Um, so Young Workers Resource Center are shorten to YWRC
for time constraint purposes.
Um, we kind of have two arms about organization, both
of them, uh, striving towards ensuring that young workers,
uh, have the tools, the skills, the knowledge
and the support, uh, to have sustainable
and thriving careers.
Um, our education arm that Nicola leads, uh,
goes out into secondary skills, TER institutes as well
as community organizations
and delivers workshops on what the working rights are,
what the laws are, what that looks like,
and also how to get support and,
and how to navigate workplace complex.
Um, the other side of our organization is our health center,
which provides free support
to any un unionized workers under the age of 36.
Um, and that support can vary a lot.
Uh, it could be, you know, just reading
and reviewing a young workers contract and explaining
and plain English what that means.
Um, but it can also go right up to supporting a young worker
to pursue a personal grievance as well as
representing them throughout that process.
Uh, so obviously this bill, um, is going
to impact our work hugely if it is successful,
and that is why we, uh, here today to submit
and strong opposition of this bill.
Um, in terms of our education, uh,
we go out into high schools
and we teach young people about their rights at work.
We are frequently the first time they've ever heard about
their working rights, despite the fact that most
of them already are in the workforce.
Um, we're also the first time for a lot of them
that they've heard about unions
and the support that is available to them through unions.
Um, the changes to the contractor laws,
specifically the implementation of the specified contractor,
uh, employment type, we see that to be, um, very confusing
and dangerous and unnecessary.
Um, we teach young workers about, uh,
the differences in employment types, uh, as well
as already touching on independent contracting.
Um, and before we begin that segment in our workshops,
we always ask young workers if they
know about the differences.
Um, you know, if they, if they know
what these different contract types mean.
Um, and the more often than not, they don't,
they frequently think that, uh, full-time
and part-time permanent are different things they don't
understand about fixed term contracts.
They have some idea about casual contracts
'cause they're probably already on them, uh,
similarly with 90 day trials.
Um, but, uh,
they don't really understand independent
contracting, uh, to begin with.
And, uh, when we go through
and we teach this segment, we provide them with scenarios of
what the reality of that working relationship looks like,
what that pattern of work is.
Um, and we think that it's going
to be increasingly hard for us to teach.
But more importantly, extremely difficult for young workers
to discern, uh, you know, a full-time
permanent employee from a specified contractor.
If the only difference is a simple label at the top
that says specified contractor.
Um, young workers do not have this education
compulsory in schools.
Uh, and we are the only organization in the country
that goes out and delivers this education.
Um, and unfortunately, we are small, so it means that,
you know, there are, there are lots of students
that miss out on this education
and entering the workforce without knowing the differences
between employment type, let alone contractors.
Um, very similarly, we provide that education about unions.
And for a lot of them, um,
we are the first time they've heard about unions.
Um, the only other time that they will get that information
and that education about unions is within
that first 30 days of employment.
If there is a collective agreement in place.
Um, without that law, around the 30 day, um, uh, extension
of, of, of the collective agreement to new, new employees,
we are gonna see more and more young workers, uh,
lacking the knowledge about unions,
but more importantly, lacking the knowledge about the
support that is available to them.
Um, this, this information needs to be given
to young workers, um,
and removing that 30 day, um, uh, clause will,
will remove that education.
Um, in our help center, we obviously deal
with personal grievances, which I'll shorten into pgs,
uh, rather frequently.
Um, and I've outlined in our submission all
of the reasons why this, uh, suite of changes are going
to punish young workers for learning not only their jobs
and their roles and the skills needed to complete the jobs,
but when young workers are entering the workforce,
we're also learning how to navigate the workforce
and we're learning how to navigate conflict.
Um, we actually do need to make mistakes.
We need to slip up because that is how we learn.
Um, and I'm sure every person on this committee has made a
mistake at work and learn to do better because of it.
Um, but what this bill will do is it will punish young
workers for learning how to do their jobs.
Um, we need to be supporting young workers to learn
what is and isn't right.
Um, and similarly, this bill will be teaching young workers
to accept mistreatment, teaching them to accept lesser.
Um, Sean who spoke earlier, touched on
how this will push young workers
to accept less and less and less.
Um, and we agree with that statement.
Um, lastly, we believe
that this bill imposes an unfair double standard.
Uh, there, you know, the provisions around, um,
employers lessening the obligations for employers
to maintain fair process if it does not result in
unfairness, um, states that younger,
that employers do not need to be, uh,
a hundred percent perfect a hundred percent of the time.
Similarly, the, the, um, the extension
of 90 day trial prohibition of, of, uh, personal grievances
to personal grievances of disadvantage, if you can relate it
to the dismissal, that just gives employers another
opportunity to hide from the accountability that they need
to be held to be.
Um, and similarly, you could say the same about the,
the changes to the remedies regarding personal grievances.
So on one hand you're saying, Hey, employers, you know, if,
if you don't do it right a hundred percent
of the time, that doesn't matter.
And in the same breath, you're telling workers
and particularly young workers that they must, uh,
be 110% perfect 10% of the time,
which is not possible because we are human.
Um, we're not gonna be a hundred percent
right hundred percent of the time.
Um, and expecting that double standard is unjust.
Um, yeah, finally, we recommend
that this bill does not, uh, does not pass.
We do not believe that this is, um, a fair bill.
We do not believe that it will, um, uh,
it will provide the flexibility
or, you know, the hope, uh, for a better employment system,
um, as has kind of been spouted throughout the media.
Um, and lastly, we just wanted to draw the attention
to the object of the Principal Act.
Uh, the employment relations, uh, uh, employment relations,
uh, act of 2000, um, in section three a I i,
which acknowledges that the purpose of this bill, um,
the principal act is to acknowledge
and address the inherent inequalities
that exist within employment relationships.
And any, uh, any relationship where one party is younger
and has less experience,
there's already gonna be a further empower imbalance.
So young workers are vulnerable in employment relationships,
and this bill will make them even further vulnerable
and block pathways to justice law.
Great. We've got a quick question from, um,
Tracy McLennan.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Kiara,
and thank you for that presentation.
That was excellent. I just wanted to note that, um,
it's not just young workers as well.
Um, so you're doing a fabulous job.
Um, having worked in a highly regulated, um,
highly organized industry, um, loads
of people don't understand, um, their rights.
So I think all of the, all
of the mahi that you're doing is amazing.
Do you have, um, any kind of examples of where you've done
that education and then can see
that ultimately it ends up in better relationships and
therefore better, better working conditions both
for the employer and the employee?
Oh, a hundred percent. Um, two examples spring to mind.
Um, one kind of quick generic one is
that we frequently at the end
of our workshops get young workers coming up
and speaking to our educators
and being like, Hey, um,
that contract type thing really hit, um, you know,
I'm definitely supposed
to be a permanent part-time employee,
but my contract says casual.
And then they come into our help center
where we support them, um,
and then we help work with their employer to, to negotiate
and, and also educate the employer on what that means.
Um, and one of my very first cases that I took back in 2021,
um, we had a great example of an employer
who just didn't know.
Um, and, uh, the employer came to us once,
once we'd finished, you know,
once we'd officially raised the issue and they came to us
and they were like, Hey, we are so sorry.
We did not know the proper way to proceed about this.
Um, would you be willing to have a sit down conversation
with us and, and go through it step by step?
And that eventuated in them, uh, seeking
external support from, from an HR like company to ensure
that the, the issue didn't happen
to, to other young workers.
Well done. That's great. Thank you so much for your time
and presenting this morning.
Appreciate your submission. Thank you.
Um, so next up we have Mustafa Haddi.
Hi, uh, hopefully Mustafa, you can hear me.
Um, and when we can see you coming on. Hi Mustafa. Hi there.
Um, welcome. Uh, we have five minutes with you, um,
including time for questions If you want to, um, go ahead.
Sure. Um, hi everyone.
Uh, thanks for the opportunity, uh, for me
to speak on this panel.
Um, uh, the reason I wanted to, uh, uh, be part
of this oral submission is to highlight, um, the, um,
uh, the working arrangement that currently I have, um,
on Uber platform.
So, uh, by profession, um,
I am a full-time online tutor, academic tutor,
and I have been, um, busy with that job
for the past 10 years.
However, in the past five years, um,
I joined the Uber platform, um, as a, as a contractor, um,
to really benefit from the flexibility of the arrangement
that they offer within their, uh, business model.
Um, so, um, basically,
um, being able to, uh,
work on, uh, Uber platform as a contractor, um,
has been a way for me to earn an extra income,
also giving me a reason, um, basically to, to be, uh,
more active and engaged, uh, in the community, uh, in
where I live, which is newcleus.
Um, basically, um, this summer has
provided me with a good balance of, um, um, um,
being engaged with my, um, community
and also being able to, uh, focus on my main work.
Um, in terms of, um, the flexibility of the work,
um, I'm able to choose my hours.
Uh, I'm able to choose, um, uh, the kind jobs that I, I wish
to, uh, fulfill, um, the duration.
And, and there are times that I don't feel working at all.
So I hope, uh, this bill does not take away
that sort relevant for people like me, um, who, uh,
probably looking for, um, uh, extra income, uh,
to fit within their lifestyle
and their current, uh, employment arrangement.
Um, uh, that's it pretty much for me.
Uh, if you have any questions, I'm happy to answer.
That's great. Thank you so much.
Um, musta, it doesn't look like we have any questions,
and I appreciate you taking the time this
morning. Thank you. No
Worries. Thank you.
Uh, so next we have, um, PS aa,
uh,
and we've got, um, Angus Wilson and Kirsten Wind.
Um, welcome, um, ua.
Um, welcome to the committee.
We have, um, hopefully coming up. You just, yeah.
Can you hear us? Just speak if you can.
Uh, yep. Yep. Great. We've got you for 10 minutes.
Um, so, um, use that time as you will,
allowing time for questions if you wish.
Uh, thank you. Um, my name's Angus
and I'm a legal officer at the PSA.
And I'm here with my colleague, uh,
Kirsten from our policy team.
Um, and the PSA is wholly against this bill,
and I'll speak to our written submission against the bill.
The, the effect of the bill is to tip the balance entirely
to towards employers.
It gives employers permission to act
with impunity towards many workers in many circumstances.
And this bill is a devastating attack on workers' rights
and their access to justice.
As many people have noted today,
the Employment Relations Act notes the inherent balance
of power between employers and workers.
This already great imbalance is deepened by this bill.
The PSA considers that the changes to contribution
and remedies effectively create a fire at will
environment for all workers.
This bill does this through effectively removing remedies
for workers who are treated unfairly by their employers.
If there's no effective remedy,
then there can be no justice.
If there is no remedy to dismissal,
then it can occur at will.
The focus is turned onto any misstep a worker may have made
while being unlawfully fired or unlawfully treated.
And it has found that the worker has put a foot wrong no
matter how poorly they were treated,
there are effectively no remedies for them.
The changes in this bill will also give employers permission
to run a flawed process so long
as the outcome is not unfair.
This change is ill considered in circular.
How can an employer determine
what is fair treatment when it is not conducted a proper
process to establish what treatment is warranted?
Workers are at risk of having to go
through an entirely unjust, degrading,
and overly invasive process
and having no recourse without whatever outrageous treatment
an employer may subject them to.
So long as the ultimate decision is considered fair at a
later date by the authority or court.
A process where guilt can be attributed without a proper
process being followed will lead workers
who have done nothing wrong to be dismissed.
A proper process would prevent such a situation
from ever occurring.
Further, we consider the authority in court already have
tools to address any poor behavior
by employees and do so already.
As we've pointed out now, written submission,
there are numerous cases this year in the authority
that show how poor employee behavior is punished
effectively when it occurs.
The bill makes these radical changes without proper evidence
to support the minister's contentions
that there is a problem here that needs addressing.
She has not, as at the time of our written submission,
provided citations for the cases.
She says, prove the need for the change.
And the regulatory impact statement
says, there are no measure.
There are essentially no measures which can identify the low
merit claims that the minister suggests
justify these radical changes.
There is a very poor evidential basis
for these radical and sweeping changes.
And it's changes to a law, to the law
that governs a central part of many Kiwi's lives.
A system where an employer can engage in bad faith,
behavior, and face no consequences, can only lead
to an upsurge in such poor behavior.
The changes to the contractor
or employee test will see vastly more people unfairly
classified as contractors, which will have the effect
of denying them basic entitlements.
No matter the reality of the situation,
it cannot be an improvement to remove the ability
of the courts or ERA
to establish the reality of a situation.
To remove The ability for this examination to occur is
to accept unfair classification of workers
and to give a green light to employers seeking to do this.
The bill willingly turns a blind eye to deliberate stripping
of basic entitlements and encourages a race to the bottom.
The change to fire at will
for workers earning over $180,000
will have a chilling effect.
This is especially relevant
to our members across the public service
and our health system and in local government,
given their obligations to provide free and frank
and high quality advice we rely on is often senior
experienced and highly skilled workers to able to,
to be able to speak up without fear of reprisal.
Provision of quality advice is vital to good governance
and contentious with difficult advice must be allowed
to be given without fear of reprisal.
Yet for those earning over $180,000,
this bill says they can be dismissed without any reason
given or any recourse to that dismissal.
This change will have a chilling effect.
The changes proposed by the bill allow employers
to not offer new workers and unionized workplaces.
The terms of the collective agreement, a key issue
with this is that it means these workers will not have full
information about pay rates at the point at which they're
negotiating their starting salary.
Lack of pay transparency is likely
to result in lower pay rates for workers,
and particularly those more likely
to be offered lower pay rates in the first
place, including women.
It will enable an equity.
The changes this bill proposes corrosive to good faith
and employment relationships.
The incentives introduced
by the bill do not encourage the parties
to resolve any issue between them.
It does not support good employment practices.
Rather, it entitles employers
to simply sack those whose views they don't like
to conduct investigations in a flawed manner
and take the chance that they can later paint an employee
as having contributed to the situation.
And inside doing that employee will be denied effective
remedies against whatever
outrageous behavior they've suffered.
This is not rebalancing the system,
it is tilting it entirely towards
already powerful employers.
A lack of consequences will promote the worst employer
behavior, and that this bill will do all
of this despite there being no evidential basis
to suggest these changes are needed.
The PSA proposes this bill has not progressed any further.
Thank you.
Uh, it looks like we have a question from Tracy McLennan.
Go ahead, Tracy.
Thank you. And thank you.
Um, Angus and Kirsten, I wonder if you had any comment
to make on the fact that,
or the observation that, look, hundreds
of people are applying for the same job at the moment.
Um, how does, how does that impact on the, on the, um,
the bargaining power for employees, do you think?
In terms of the current climate?
Yeah, it would be extremely weak.
And the suggestion that employees, workers in
that situation have any bargaining power is ridiculous.
That they would have none.
And so they would have to accept whatever
an employer offered them, uh,
because people are so desperate
for work. Okay.
Just have a follow up if you've, if we've got time.
Madam chair. Go ahead.
The 30 day clause, um, is interesting.
Um, obviously when I think most people watching this would
identify with the fact that, um, when you first start a job,
there's so much, um, information
and often people aren't even
provided with their employment contract,
you know, when they should be.
So that 30 day clause, um, gives,
I would've imagined both the employer and the employees
and breathing space to get a whole lot
of stuff underway whilst, um, retaining the right
for further information about, um, unions.
Do you have any data
or any, um, further information on the utility
and the how the 30 day clause works?
We don't have data, but we do know that in the workplaces
where, where we are present, where the PSA has members that,
um, the people who join the PSA, they tell us when they,
when they call up or they talk
to a PSA staff member afterwards, they talk about the value
of having that collective agreement
and being able to have the conversation with, say,
for example, a workplace delegate about that so
that they understand how the workplace works
and what the employer's policies are and things as well.
So in fact, that actually does quite, uh,
does quite a good job of
inducting people into the workplace.
Well, it's part of that process.
So, um, we know from our considerable experience that, um,
it is a very positive thing, um, to have in place.
And it, and it is, um, as Angus has said, um,
it's a wholly negative, uh, thing that it's being removed,
um, by the bill.
Thank you so much for your time.
Um, appreciate you, um, coming in, presenting.
Um, and do we have the local government
committee of the PSA as well?
Is that you Benedict? That's
Me. Kilda.
Wonderful. Thank you very much.
Um, so we have 10 minutes with you as well, um, so you can,
um, use that time as you like with, um,
time for questions as well.
Wonderful. Thank you. ATO called Benedict Ferguson Toga.
I'm, um, representing, um, the Public Service Association,
Tuhi our local government sector.
Um, I've also got Tom Buckley alongside with me.
I was just head of Tom to introduce himself. Thanks, Tom.
I'm Tom Buckley. I'm the assistant secretary
for local government ESA supporting benefit today.
Um, we are representing all our workers, all our members
that work in local government in New Zealand.
Over 11,000 of these dedicated public
and community service workers.
They work in areas such as libraries.
Uh, they run our pools and leisurer centers.
They pick up our waste. They run our transport systems.
They keep the life brunt of our communities running.
Uh, our members are not only employers, they rate payers,
voters, and active business in their communities.
We're really concerned about the attacks on
workers' rights from this bill.
Um, it goes against everything we are committed to
around delivering high quality,
effective democratically and grounded services.
So we are urging the select committee
to oppose all these changes in this bill.
Um, I'll go through a sort of headline of our summary
of our submission and move into questions.
So our key concerns are removal of the 30 day rule.
Um, what our colleague just previously said
around the PSA's main submission is it does approve
that requirement for new employees
to be offered similar terms and conditions on a site
and receive union information.
We we're starting their job. It is really important
for new workers when they come into the workplace
to know their union, know who they are,
to ask those questions
that they have when they're coming into an organization.
We are pretty, um, proud of how we navigate those things
and onboard members into both local
government and public services.
How the place works and committing to our, yeah,
delivering those high quality services.
Um, with this marked high unemployment, um, it is pretty,
um, it does reduce
that power imbalance if this role is brought in place
and it may make new staff feel a little bit intimidated
or may jeopardize their employment process if they do
seek advice on collective negotiations.
If employers are no longer required
to provide this information, it's a big risk for us.
Um, workers may never learn about their rights
or feel safe enough to explore union membership.
That's especially true for young workers.
We find that the experience
of our younger workers is they
don't know much about the workplace.
They dunno much about employment law,
and we fill that gap by guiding them through
what their rights are at work.
The second bit that we, uh, don't agree
with is union visibility and access.
So the ability undermines the ability
for unions to engage with new workers.
Again, what I mentioned before around having
that vital challenge for outreach
and how they can get education.
This isn't just an administrative change,
it's a structural change that weakens the foundation
of collective representation
and leaves workers isolated and vulnerable.
I'll touch on the personal grievances.
We, we oppose these changes to
how personal grievances dealt with.
Um, the reality is that employees already hold a
significantly more power,
power in the employment relationship.
And these changes would further tip the scale
of making workers more vulnerable and less protected.
The next one around redefining
employer and contract the test.
Uh, this change will make it easier for employees
to misclassify workers, stripping them with their basic, uh,
employment rights and protections.
I think the, the test
for employment status must remain flexible,
grounded in realities of the working relationship
and not just the wordings and contract law.
Limiting the court's discretion undermines the principle
of fairness and opens the door to exploitation.
Finally, we think this bill is a backward step for ITRR.
We believe in a fair and balanced employment system, one
that protects dignity, security,
and the voice for all workers.
This bill moves in the opposite direction.
We're asking the committee to reject this bill in its
entirety and q in our time for questions.
Uh, Tracy McLennan.
Thank you Benedict, and thank you Tom.
That was really interesting.
I, um, I just that last point that you made, um,
about employment status, which, um, I think, um,
a lay person doesn't always know the difference
and that's the problem, isn't it?
Um, if I had a dollar for every time, um,
I come across someone that was said that they were a casual
employee when they were most definitely not a casual
employee, then, um, you know, that's pretty mind blowing.
So can you just give us a little bit more information about
the, the different employment statuses and,
and the role that proper information plays to c clarify
that both for the employer and for the employee.
'cause I'm assuming that the ultimate goal is
for neither party to be doing anything wrong
and for the relationship to be strong.
Yeah, I might hand over to Tom for this.
My, my only words at the start of that would be, um, clarity
around that is really important.
It's the unknown
and having as much clarity as we can, ensuring
that there is still that fairness
and protection for workers.
Tom may have a bit more to say on that. Thanks.
Thanks. Thanks, Tracy.
I think that the, um, the key issue, I guess I would,
I'd talk to on this point is that, um, currently, um,
the system we have around this allows for, uh, chance
for review if they get it wrong.
And because sometimes employers will get it wrong,
and often the people who are playing the role in casual
work, part-time work or contracting work, um, don't have,
um, access to, um, the resources that would allow them
to kind of navigate these areas.
So the construction of a gateway approach would be a
significant disadvantage to those that don't have access
to the information and resources to be able
to navigate that space.
And so it's important that, um, people have the ability
to take good advice
and there is a, um, a range of ways that can be done,
but simply the, the removal of the ability to, um, ensure
that there's natural justice
and assessing whether a person really is an employee ready
to probe that and has a significant impact on,
I suspect the people who have been most vulnerable
and least, um, beneficial in terms of the economy as well
to see this kind of process go through.
And I think we heard, um, other people would've,
the committee would've heard from other people who play, um,
you know, part of the role on the gig economy.
And it's really concerning to see how that might flow on
for local councils for local government.
Um, there's many examples of people, um,
sitting in the spaces where they could fall into the, um,
the position of being contractors
and there are big impacts to workers
who are misclared classified or put into those positions.
So I think it's really important we, um, ensure
that there are position to the changes noted.
Do you have a further question, Tracy?
Um, if I could just touching on, um, the process
of personal grievance.
Um, again, it's one of those things that's often, um,
misunderstood because you can feel aggrieved at work,
but it doesn't mean that you can take a personal grievance.
Can you just clarify, um, for our information, um,
what the grounds are.
The grounds are quite limited, aren't they,
to take a personal grievance.
So what does this bill do to, um, further,
um, narrow those grounds?
Um, I might jump in and just initially reply,
be first comments you wanna make, um, please jump in.
But I would say that, um, in terms of that question,
there are quite significant restrictions that are well
outside of where other jurisdictions would play
for a person grievance, for example, you only have 90 days
to raise a matter, and that can be quite a challenge
for a person who's on low income
or, um, is looking for representation, trying
to navigate boasted dismissal
or an action that's unjustified,
and then the ability to take advice, um,
and support to go through that process.
So there is a significant amount of things there,
but the key thing I'd like to say is
that we already have the ability for terminations to occur
where they're reasonable and when they're justified.
But this proposal around the, both the, the, um,
the the 180, um, those on, on incomes
of greater than 180 kilo, um, um, thousand dollars, um,
being removed is that this will allow unreasonable
and unjustified dismissals
to occur without the right of challenge.
And that's a really significant step away from
where we have been on the basis of what we see as fear.
And I think it's significantly outta step of what, um,
many responsible
and good employers would see as appropriate, um,
practice for dismissals.
And I think it's really important that we, um, give, um,
surface that and make sure that we can talk to that, um,
impact and that point.
Do you see it as being a problem that, um, you know, with,
with the theme of today's submissions as being that it,
there's a lack of clarity and a lack of knowledge, um,
across the board in terms of employment relationships
and employment rights.
So if you've got a group of people, um, who are able
to be fired at will and another group
who aren't based on an arbitrary threshold, could
that confuse, um, more than just the people
that it's relevant to?
I think it will do. I think you'll see chilling people
like others have said today, um, in terms
of all employees will be concerned about whether there in
one camp or the other because it's both this in the 90 day
trial periods that have been introduced
and then a range of other measures that will give, um,
I think greater uncertainty and lack of clarity.
Thank you. Great. Well thank you very much, um,
for your time this morning
and, um, presenting your submission.
Very much appreciated. Thanks
Kiara.
Kiara. Um,
and so we have um, den
Abdu Rahman.
Good morning. Uh, we have five minutes with you.
Um, you can take your submission is read
and, um, during your time you have time
for, uh, questions as well.
Thank you so much. Um, ano, my name is Norden Abdurahman
and thanks for the opportunity
and I'm here to speak in strong opposition to this bill
and particularly for the proposed change to section six
of the Employment Relations Act.
I do not, I do so not only as a city counselor, uh,
with Uber driver Constitu,
but as someone who has lived the life of an Uber driver,
I know what it feels like to work long hours
with little pay under the control of global company
that sets all rules but takes no responsibility.
I know the struggle to keep your car roadworthy
while your income barely covers rates, food and, uh, petrol.
And I know what it means when a single app notification
decides whether you can work
or whether you go home empty handed.
Uber loves to say you can be your own boss,
but the truth is my boss was not me.
It was a robot.
An algorithm decides when I worked where I went,
how much I age, whether I could keep driving.
The only time I felt like my own boss was when I decided is
whether to stop for the ami, Turkish kaba
or MacDonough between rides.
If that is self-employment, if that is being your own boss,
then I guess I was the most underpaid CEO in New Zealand
taking orders from a robot.
This bill takes away the only real tool.
People like me had to fight back the fight of the courts
to look at the real relationship
between a worker and the employer.
Right now, the law allows a court
to ask if this truly is a contractor
or if this is an employee in all.
But name that safeguard matters
because we know
that powers companies will always write
contracts in their own favor.
We know that they will call you a contractor when you are
really under their control.
The courts are the one place where workers can cut
through the spin and the paperwork and get a fair decision.
But under this bill, if an employer simply writes
and depend on contractor into the contract
and ticks a few boxes, then the court will be locked out.
No matter what the reality is on the ground,
workers will be struck.
And this is not a small legal tweak.
This is a massive shift in power away from workers
and towards multinational and who will suffer.
There will not be highly paid contractors
with accountant lawyers.
It'll be people on low income people
who cannot afford to lose even a single week's pay for them.
This bill means fewer rights, less protection,
and no pathway to challenge unfair treatment.
It means being left alone to fight against global company
that can hire top lawyers and drag out cases for years.
And in our case, the Uber case took us about four years.
What about people? Those languages not
English, their first language?
Let's be honest, these are the people.
Companies like Uber rely on migrants like me,
foreign former refugees like my wife, students, new arrivals
who need work fast.
When a 20 page contract arrives in legal English,
most will, you know, just sign.
That's what I did. They will not have the confidence
and fluency to argue back.
This bill pertains to give them time to get advice,
but that is meaningless without the power to negotiate.
So let's be clear, this Bill creates a two tier system
of work, New Zealand and New Zealand, one side
secure employee with right on the other side,
a growing class of workers with no real protection,
no security, no voice.
This bill will do undo the, the progress
that have been achieved To some extent,
it'll grow back justice
and it would send message that in New Zealand,
the laws service the powerful first and the vulnerable lost.
I cannot accept that.
And I urge you or
and the public listening to reject this change downside
with a global corporation at the expense
of hardworking New Zealanders.
Stand up for fairness, stand up for dignity, stand up
for principle that no one, no matter how poor, how new
to this country, how fluent you are, you should be.
You shouldn't be left without rights. Thank you so much.
Thank you very much. Um,
that's all we have time for this morning.
So I appreciate we've met time
and um, thank you for so much for coming in.
Uh, next we have the tertiary Education Union
and we've got Sandra Gray.
Good morning Sandra. Good
Morning. Morning. We have, um,
10 minutes with you.
Um, if you want to include time for questions.
That's, uh, the time is yours. Go ahead.
Thank you very much Kda
to all the select committee members.
My name's Sandra Gray. I am the National Secretary
of the Tertiary Education Union to
and uh, here representing around 11
and a half thousand workers in universities, polytechnic
and in private training establishments, uh,
from in the Cargill right through, uh, to re um,
I just, uh, want to begin
by saying the TEU opposes this legislation
and the changes, uh, that or this bill
and the changes that it proposes
to the employment relations, uh, act.
We oppose it because all workers in our sector are going
to be negatively impacted by this legislation.
We have some of the most vulnerable workers you could
imagine working on, um, fixed term
or hourly paid, uh, employment agreements through to,
of course, professors and associate deans
and deputy vice chancellors who are our members.
And they are all being impacted
and having rights taken away from them by the proposal, uh,
to take away the 30 day rule.
The proposal to amend contractor status, the the proposal
to stop personal grievance for high income workers.
And in short, all of the changes put together
do shift the balance
of power far more greatly in an employer's, uh, favor
and leave workers out in the cold.
One of the key roles of any government in any parliament is
to look after all citizens.
This bill contradicts that requirement for parliament
to look after the citizens, the worker citizens
of New Zealand, um,
and looks only, uh, to providing power to employers.
So I wanna just very briefly say when it comes
to the contractor status changes,
as we do have tutors
and demonstrators, library assistant, a whole range
of people who are needed year on year in
university's polytechnics.
And one to do the very core work of the institutions
who might now be misclassified as contractors
and have even less connection to the institutions.
Why is this important? We all need a very strong,
good quality public tertiary education system.
And workers who feel no connection
because they're not deemed to be employees,
will not have a reason to think long term.
To think about the stability of the sector, to think about
how to innovate, create amazing research opportunities
because all they'll be thinking about is what their contract
as a contractor says,
and what minimal amount they're being paid as contractors
and whether they're gonna have any work tomorrow,
let alone next year.
We do know that we have a lot
of high income earners in our membership
and we do not understand why they should not be able
to raise a personal grievance.
It's a fundamental right of workers.
And the 90 day rule is also in this category.
It's a fundamental right to know why you've lost a job.
How can you do anything
to make sure you can keep insecure jobs if no one will speak
to you about why you have lost your job.
Uh, we do have very strong, uh, publicly funded
employers, but I can see this being used
to get rid of squeaky wheels.
And we don't want that in university systems.
We need a university system
where people feel they can speak publicly,
not just about big public issues like
where the legislation looks after citizens and workers,
but also we want university staff to be able
to speak publicly about the quality of education
and the quality of research going on.
I think the far will approach in this bill, uh,
will see a chilling effect, as others have said,
where academics just don't want to put their neck out
for anything, for fear
that they could just be dismissed out out of hand
and be given no reason
and no recourse to Justice
Parliament should always err on the side
of protecting justice and protect, protecting its citizens.
Uh, and that's why this bill should absolutely be rejected.
As for the 30 day rule, uh, we are a union
that really benefits from the fact
that when people join, we are visible.
We are on site, we are there, they can see the TEU,
but there are many workplaces.
Whether it's very hard to find out about your union
because of anti-union employers, I am gonna say we need
to make it easy for people
to be engaged in their workplaces,
to be engaged in their society.
We need to make it as easy as possible to allow people
to associate unions
or groups of workers choosing to associate with each other
to make sure that they have decent lives.
No parliament, no parliament should take
that away from the workers of New Zealand.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much for that, Sandra.
Um, it doesn't look like we have any questions, so, um,
thank you very much for your time.
Thank you. Great.
I, um,
and so we have one more, uh, submitter before our break.
Um, hopefully, uh, we've got Yvonne Oldfield.
Yvonne, do you wanna turn on your camera?
I think I have at this end. Can you, can
You hear me? No, we can't. Oh,
I can hear you. Can't see you.
And it's showing that you've got your camera off.
It's showing as being on at this end.
Okay. Well, um, let's, um, go ahead.
Anyway, uh, we have, uh, five minutes with you, um,
including any time that there might be for questions if you,
um, uh,
Your, your prompts come through now.
Oh, great. Marvelous. And just disappeared again.
So, um, can
You send resend that prompt?
Great. Don't do anything. It's perfect now, hopefully.
Can you see me now? No, actually we can't
thought it was gonna come up, but it hasn't.
Wait, something's happening.
Uh, then just go ahead please, Yvonne.
Okay. Alright. Look, thank you for the opportunity
to provide a little bit more explanation
of my submission on the proposed amendments.
As you could see, that submission was directed
to the potential for aspects of the bill to contravene
key international labor standards.
Um, it shouldn't be taken from that, that I don't, uh,
share some of the concerns raised, for example,
by the previous speaker.
Um, who obviously, uh, is the, um, leader
of my own union in the tertiary education union.
I certainly endorse the points that she's made,
but I would like to just emphasize a couple
of key points in relation, um, to, uh, compliance
with international labor standards.
The first relates to the consequences of failure to comply
with the elect declaration on fundamental
principles and rights at work.
Uh, so as noted in my submission,
this ILO declaration is binding on
all member states of the ILO by virtue of membership,
regardless of whether the underpinning conventions have been
specifically ratified by the member state in question.
That means that even though we have ratified only seven
of the 10 conventions, we are in fact bound by the mall.
Now those obligations contrary to
what some people think are not merely symbolic, um,
or window dressing, they do actually have practical effect.
And we see this by the fact that compliance with all
of the fundamental principles
and rights is a term of our 2024, uh,
free trade agreement with the European Union that
that entered into force on the 1st of May of that year.
And indeed, that particular free trade agreement also
requires compliance with a declaration on social justice
for a, a fair globalization and the decent work agenda.
And the decent work agenda in particularly,
is potentially undermined by some
of the proposed changes in the amendment bill.
So RTRO museum will be compromised in its relationship
with trading partners if it falls
behind these internationally rec recognized benchmarks.
And in particular, uh, I'm thinking of the 30 day rule, um,
which as Sandra pointed out in her,
the preceding submission, um, is an essential part
of freedom of association
and freedom to organize a practical component without which
those rights become effectively meaningless.
So the second main point that I wish to emphasize,
and these are really illustrative, I've just,
I've just identified a couple which are particularly
critical, relates to the proposed changes to
how an employment relationship is identified
and the departure from the scheme outlined in recommendation
1 9 8, which I have, uh, outlined in my submission.
So recommendation 1 9 8 on the employment relationship is an
autonomous instrument.
It's not linked to a convention, but like a convention.
It was drawn up by representatives
of the tripartite constituents, so governments, employers
and workers, and adopted at an,
at the Annual International Labor Conference.
Unlike a convention, there's no requirement
for member states to ratify recommendation
as they're intended to provide guidance on questions
of policy and implementation.
However, at the time that the recommendation was adopted,
New Zealand was in fact leading in this area.
And the provisions of our current statute were are they are
compliant with the terms of, uh, recommendation 1, 9 8.
And in fact, we had been largely compliant with elements of
that recommendation for some time.
That was when it was adopted in 2006.
I just want to, to, um, emphasize
that the employment relationship recommendation was the
final outcome of a very lengthy process that that
took over 10 years.
Um, entailed 30 empirical
detailed empirical studies from all around the world, um,
on the issues of contract labor
and the scope of the employment relationship.
And it was accompanied by a follow-up resolution,
which required the ILO
to assist member states in implementing the terms
of the recommendation.
Now, what that recommendation really
represents is an international consensus,
largely consensus compromised position
on a way forward in managing matters relating to the scope
of the employment relationship.
It wasn't easily or likely arrived at it.
It it reflected years of difficult debate
on the issue and attempts to balance the interests of all
of the tripartite constituents.
And it represented a very hard one
and robust proposal for a way forward on those issues.
That proposal included referring to the real nature
of the relationship in seeking
to identify when someone was an employee or not,
and to depart from that very robust piece
of work at this point is an incredibly retrograde
step for New Zealand.
The recommendation didn't necessarily represent what any
of the constituents ideally wanted.
It represented as I say, a very hard one
compromise and that, um, acknowledgement of the real nature
of the relationship was a key component of that.
So I'd just really like to conclude by saying that, um,
I do encourage the select committee to be mindful
of our international obligations, that it is a mistake
to see those as being merely symbolic
or, or window dressing.
They're not, they have real implications
for us entering into practical relationships with
key trading partners.
Um, they are observed
and, um, adhered to by many of those key trading
Commitments. Thank you. Um,
thank you Yvonne.
I'll just have to cut you off there
'cause we have no time and exceeded time.
Thank you. Thank you. Cheers.
Uh, all right, members, uh, we have, um, just
slightly early reach time for our break.
Um, and we will, um, reconvene at um, 1220.
See you all then. Cheers.